Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazed title to my certain right.
I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.
Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,
And here am I, and wood within this wood,
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you?
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
For I am sick when I do look on thee.
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not;
To trust the opportunity of night,
And the ill counsel of a desert place,
With the rich worth of your virginity.
I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
I will not stay thy questions; let me go;
Or, if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
Stay on thy peril; I alone will go.            Exit
O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
So should the murdered look; and so should I,
Pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty;
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
You spend your passion on a mispris'd mood:
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood;
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
An if I could, what should I get therefore?
There is no following her in this fierce vein;
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.         [Lies down]
[Awaking] O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou hold'st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.
If e'er I lov'd her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd,
And now to Helen is it home return'd,
There to remain.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.
                   Enter HERMIA
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
I say I love thee more than he can do.
Quick, come.
No, no, he will
Seem to break loose- take on as you would follow,
But yet come not. You are a tame man; go!
I would I had your bond; for I perceive
A weak bond holds you; I'll not trust your word.
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone; speak not of Helena;
Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.
Follow! Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
                               Exeunt LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS
Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?
Yea, art thou there?
Abide me, if thou dar'st; for well I wot
Thou run'st before me, shifting every place,
And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face.
Where art thou now?
Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this dear,
If ever I thy face by daylight see;
Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day's approach look to be visited.
                                      [Lies down and sleeps]
                   Enter HELENA
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
And I in fury hither followed them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power-
But by some power it is- my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betroth'd ere I saw Hermia.
But, like a sickness, did I loathe this food;
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will for evermore be true to it.
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.
Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?
Why, then, we are awake; let's follow him;
And by the way let us recount our dreams.             Exeunt
No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses do.
It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
discourse, my lord.
                   Enter PYRAMUS
No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear
without warning.
The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.
Not so, my lord; for his valour cannot carry his
discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
He should have worn the horns on his head.
He dares not come there for the candle; for, you see, it
is already in snuff.
Why, all these should be in the lantern; for all these
are in the moon. But silence; here comes Thisby.
                    Re-enter THISBY
Well roar'd, Lion.
And then came Pyramus.
No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.
A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which
Thisby, is the better- he for a man, God warrant us: She for a
woman, God bless us!
And thus she moans, videlicet:-
Ay, and Wall too.
