O grim-look'd night! O night with hue so black!
O night, which ever art when day is not!
O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisby's promise is forgot!
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
That stand'st between her father's ground and mine;
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.
                                 [WALL holds up his fingers]
Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for this!
But what see what see I? No Thisby do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
Curs'd he thy stones for thus deceiving me!
No, in truth, sir, he should not. Deceiving me is Thisby's
cue. She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall.
You shall see it will fall pat as I told you; yonder she comes.
                      Enter THISBY
I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face.
Thisby!
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace;
And like Limander am I trusty still.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
O, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
For, by thy gracious golden, glittering gleams,
I trust to take of truest Thisby sight.
         But stay, O spite!
         But mark, poor knight,
       What dreadful dole is here!
         Eyes, do you see?
         How can it he?
       O dainty duck! O dear!
         Thy mantle good,
         What! stain'd with blood?
       Approach, ye Furies fell.
         O Fates! come, come;
         Cut thread and thrum;
       Quail, crush, conclude, and quell.
O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame?
Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear;
Which is- no, no- which was the fairest dame
That liv'd, that lov'd, that lik'd, that look'd with cheer.
         Come, tears, confound;
         Out, sword, and wound
       The pap of Pyramus;
         Ay, that left pap,
         Where heart doth hop.               [Stabs himself]
       Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
         Now am I dead,
         Now am I fled;
       My soul is in the sky.
         Tongue, lose thy light;
         Moon, take thy flight.             [Exit MOONSHINE]
       Now die, die, die, die, die.                   [Dies]
