Is all our company here?
Here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought
fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke
and the Duchess on his wedding-day at night.
Marry, our play is 'The most Lamentable Comedy and most
Cruel Death of Pyramus and Thisby.'
Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.
Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
Flute, you must take Thisby on you.
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
That's all one; you shall play it in a mask, and you may
speak as small as you will.
No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisby.
Robin Starveling, the tailor.
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother.
Tom Snout, the tinker.
You, Pyramus' father; myself, Thisby's father; Snug, the
joiner, you, the lion's part. And, I hope, here is a play fitted.
You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the
Duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; and that were
enough to hang us all.
You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a
sweet-fac'd man; a proper man, as one shall see in a summer's
day; a most lovely gentleman-like man; therefore you must needs
play Pyramus.
Why, what you will.
Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then
you will play bare-fac'd. But, masters, here are your parts; and
I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them by
to-morrow night; and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without
the town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse; for if we meet in
the city, we shall be dogg'd with company, and our devices known.
In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties, such as our
play wants. I pray you, fail me not.
At the Duke's oak we meet.
Pat, pat; and here's a marvellous convenient place for our
rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn
brake our tiring-house; and we will do it in action, as we will
do it before the Duke.
What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be written
in eight and six.
Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things- that
is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber; for, you know, Pyramus
and Thisby meet by moonlight.
Yes, it doth shine that night.
Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a
lantern, and say he comes to disfigure or to present the person
of Moonshine. Then there is another thing: we must have a wall in
the great chamber; for Pyramus and Thisby, says the story, did
talk through the chink of a wall.
If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every
mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin; when
you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake; and so every
one according to his cue.
                      Enter PUCK behind
Speak, Pyramus. Thisby, stand forth.
'Odious'- odorous!
Ay, marry, must you; for you must understand he goes but to
see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.
'Ninus' tomb,' man! Why, you must not speak that yet; that
you answer to Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues, and
all. Pyramus enter: your cue is past; it is 'never tire.'
O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters! fly,
masters! Help!
                              Exeunt all but BOTTOM and PUCK
Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art translated.
Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come home yet?
It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able
to discharge Pyramus but he.
Yea, and the best person too; and he is a very paramour for
a sweet voice.
Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
