How now, spirit! whither wander you?
The King doth keep his revels here to-night;
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight;
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
Because that she as her attendant hath
A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king.
She never had so sweet a changeling;
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;
But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square, that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
Thou speakest aright:
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough;
And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh,
And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room, fairy, here comes Oberon.
I remember.
I'll put a girdle round about the earth
In forty minutes.                                  Exit PUCK
Ay, there it is.
Fear not, my lord; your servant shall do so.      Exeunt
     Through the forest have I gone,
         But Athenian found I none
         On whose eyes I might approve
         This flower's force in stirring love.
         Night and silence- Who is here?
         Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
         This is he, my master said,
         Despised the Athenian maid;
         And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
         On the dank and dirty ground.
         Pretty soul! she durst not lie
         Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
         Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
         All the power this charm doth owe:
         When thou wak'st let love forbid
         Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
         So awake when I am gone;
         For I must now to Oberon.                      Exit
           Enter DEMETRIUS and HELENA, running
What hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here,
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor;
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.
A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here!           Exit
I'll follow you; I'll lead you about a round,
Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier;
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.
The shallowest thickskin of that barren sort,
Who Pyramus presented, in their sport
Forsook his scene and ent'red in a brake;
When I did him at this advantage take,
An ass's nole I fixed on his head.
Anon his Thisby must be answered,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly;
And at our stamp here, o'er and o'er one falls;
He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong,
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.
I led them on in this distracted fear,
And left sweet Pyramus translated there;
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania wak'd, and straightway lov'd an ass.
I took him sleeping- that is finish'd too-
And the Athenian woman by his side;
That, when he wak'd, of force she must be ey'd.
             Enter DEMETRIUS and HERMIA
This is the woman, but not this the man.
Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
I go, I go; look how I go,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.               Exit
        Captain of our fairy band,
            Helena is here at hand,
            And the youth mistook by me
            Pleading for a lover's fee;
            Shall we their fond pageant see?
            Lord, what fools these mortals be!
        Then will two at once woo one.
            That must needs be sport alone;
            And those things do best please me
            That befall prepost'rously.
               Enter LYSANDER and HELENA
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
At whose approach ghosts, wand'ring here and there,
Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all
That in cross-ways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone,
For fear lest day should look their shames upon;
They wilfully themselves exil'd from light,
And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night.
     Up and down, up and down,
         I will lead them up and down.
         I am fear'd in field and town.
         Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.
                  Enter LYSANDER
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
Follow me, then,
To plainer ground.      Exit LYSANDER as following the voice
                  Enter DEMETRIUS
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child;
I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defil'd
That draws a sword on thee.
Follow my voice; we'll try no manhood here.       Exeunt
                  Re-enter LYSANDER
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?
Come hither; I am here.
      Yet but three? Come one more;
          Two of both kinds makes up four.
          Here she comes, curst and sad.
          Cupid is a knavish lad,
          Thus to make poor females mad.
                 Enter HERMIA
         On the ground
             Sleep sound;
             I'll apply
             To your eye,
      Gentle lover, remedy.
                    [Squeezing the juice on LYSANDER'S eyes]
             When thou wak'st,
             Thou tak'st
             True delight
             In the sight
      Of thy former lady's eye;
      And the country proverb known,
      That every man should take his own,
      In your waking shall be shown:
             Jack shall have Jill;
             Nought shall go ill;
The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
                  OBERON behind, unseen
Now when thou wak'st with thine own fool's eyes peep.
      Fairy King, attend and mark;
          I do hear the morning lark.
     Now the hungry lion roars,
         And the wolf behowls the moon;
         Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
         All with weary task fordone.
         Now the wasted brands do glow,
         Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
         Puts the wretch that lies in woe
         In remembrance of a shroud.
         Now it is the time of night
         That the graves, all gaping wide,
         Every one lets forth his sprite,
         In the church-way paths to glide.
         And we fairies, that do run
         By the triple Hecate's team
         From the presence of the sun,
         Following darkness like a dream,
         Now are frolic. Not a mouse
         Shall disturb this hallowed house.
         I am sent with broom before,
         To sweep the dust behind the door.
     Enter OBERON and TITANIA, with all their train
     If we shadows have offended,
         Think but this, and all is mended,
         That you have but slumb'red here
         While these visions did appear.
         And this weak and idle theme,
         No more yielding but a dream,
         Gentles, do not reprehend.
         If you pardon, we will mend.
         And, as I am an honest Puck,
         If we have unearned luck
         Now to scape the serpent's tongue,
         We will make amends ere long;
         Else the Puck a liar call.
         So, good night unto you all.
         Give me your hands, if we be friends,
         And Robin shall restore amends.                Exit
