So 'tis reported, sir.
His love and wisdom,
Approv'd so to your Majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.
It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
Young Bertram.
'Tis our hope, sir,
After well-ent'red soldiers, to return
And find your Grace in health.
O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
There's honour in the theft.
Farewell, Captain.
We shall, noble Captain.
And grant it.
Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Grace's part; black and fearful
On the opposer.
But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.
If your lordship find him not a hiding, hold me no more
in your respect.
It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in his
virtue, which he hath not, he might at some great and trusty
business in a main danger fail you.
None better than to let him fetch off his drum, which
you hear him so confidently undertake to do.
O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he
says he has a stratagem for't. When your lordship sees the bottom
of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of
ore will be melted, if you give him not John Drum's
entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. Here he comes.
                  Enter PAROLLES
A pox on 't; let it go; 'tis but a drum.
That was not to be blam'd in the command of the
service; it was a disaster of war that Caesar himself could not
have prevented, if he had been there to command.
You do not know him, my lord, as we do. Certain it is
that he will steal himself into a man's favour, and for a week
escape a great deal of discoveries; but when you find him out,
you have him ever after.
We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him.
He was first smok'd by the old Lord Lafeu. When his disguise and
he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him; which you
shall see this very night.
But you say she's honest.
With all my heart, my lord.                 Exeunt
I have deliv'red it an hour since. There is something
in't that stings his nature; for on the reading it he chang'd
almost into another man.
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure
of the King, who had even tun'd his bounty to sing happiness to
him. I will tell you a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly
with you.
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in Florence,
of a most chaste renown; and this night he fleshes his will in
the spoil of her honour. He hath given her his monumental ring,
and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.
Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of
all treasons we still see them reveal themselves till they attain
to their abhorr'd ends; so he that in this action contrives
against his own nobility, in his proper stream, o'erflows
himself.
Not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.
We will not meddle with him till he come; for his
presence must be the whip of the other.
I hear there is an overture of peace.
What will Count Rousillon do then? Will he travel
higher, or return again into France?
Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a great deal
of his act.
How is this justified?
Hath the Count all this intelligence?
I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
And how mightily some other times we drown our gain in
tears! The great dignity that his valour hath here acquir'd for
him shall at home be encount'red with a shame as ample.
They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.
Here's his lordship now.
                    Enter BERTRAM
How now, my lord, is't not after midnight?
I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword
clean; nor believe he can have everything in him by wearing his
apparel neatly.
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold
linguist, and the amnipotent soldier.
Why does he ask him of me?
God bless you, Captain Parolles.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu? I am
for France.
