Good captain, let me be th' interpreter.
No, sir, I warrant you.
E'en such as you speak to me.
Boskos thromuldo boskos.
Boskos vauvado. I understand thee, and can speak thy
tongue. Kerely-bonto, sir, betake thee to thy faith, for
seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.
O, pray, pray, pray! Manka revania dulche.
The General is content to spare thee yet;
And, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.
But wilt thou faithfully?
Acordo linta.
Come on; thou art granted space.
               Exit, PAROLLES guarded. A short alarum within
He calls for the tortures. What will you say without
'em?
Bosko chimurcho.
YOU are a merciful general. Our General bids you
answer to what I shall ask you out of a note.
'First demand of him how many horse the Duke is
strong.' What say you to that?
Shall I set down your answer so?
Well, that's set down.
Well, that's set down.
'Demand of him of what strength they are a-foot.'
What say you to that?
Well, that's set down. 'You shall demand of him
whether one Captain Dumain be i' th' camp, a Frenchman; what his
reputation is with the Duke, what his valour, honesty, expertness
in wars; or whether he thinks it were not possible, with
well-weighing sums of gold, to corrupt him to a revolt.' What say
you to this? What do you know of it?
Do you know this Captain Dumain?
Well, is this captain in the Duke of Florence's
camp?
What is his reputation with the Duke?
Marry, we'll search.
Here 'tis; here's a paper. Shall I read it to you?
 [Reads]  'Dian, the Count's a fool, and full of
gold.'
Nay, I'll read it first by your favour.
                                        [Reads]
'When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it;
After he scores, he never pays the score.
Half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
He ne'er pays after-debts, take it before.
And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
For count of this, the Count's a fool, I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine, as he vow'd to thee in thine ear,
                                               PAROLLES.'
I perceive, sir, by our General's looks we shall be
fain to hang you.
We'll see what may be done, so you confess freely;
therefore, once more to this Captain Dumain: you have answer'd to
his reputation with the Duke, and to his valour; what is his
honesty?
What say you to his expertness in war?
His qualities being at this poor price, I need not
to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
What's his brother, the other Captain Dumain?
What's he?
If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray
the Florentine?
I'll whisper with the General, and know his
pleasure.
There is no remedy, sir, but you must die.
The General says you that have so traitorously discover'd the
secrets of your army, and made such pestiferous reports of men
very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use; therefore
you must die. Come, headsman, of with his head.
That shall you, and take your leave of all your
friends.  [Unmuffling him]  So look about you; know you any here?
You are undone, Captain, all but your scarf; that
has a knot on 't yet.
If you could find out a country where but women were
that had received so much shame, you might begin an impudent
nation. Fare ye well, sir; I am for France too; we shall speak of
you there.                                Exit with SOLDIERS
