And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death anew;
but I must attend his Majesty's command, to whom I am now in
ward, evermore in subjection.
What is it, my good lord, the King languishes of?
I heard not of it before.
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
The best wishes that can be forg'd in your thoughts be
servants to you!  [To HELENA]  Be comfortable to my mother, your
mistress, and make much of her.
My thanks and duty are your Majesty's.
His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.
Some six months since, my lord.
Thank your Majesty.                 Exeunt [Flourish]
I am commanded here and kept a coil with
'Too young' and next year' and "Tis too early.'
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
Till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with. By heaven, I'll steal away.
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortur'd body.
Stay; the King!
And I will do so.
And so 'tis.
My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your Highness,
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.
Yes, my good lord;
But never hope to know why I should marry her.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't.
Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it, I find that she which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base is now
The praised of the King; who, so ennobled,
Is as 'twere born so.
I take her hand.
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.
O my Parolles, they have married me!
I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
There's letters from my mother; what th' import is I know
not yet.
It shall be so; I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled; write to the King
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike. War is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.
Go with me to my chamber and advise me.
I'll send her straight away. To-morrow
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
And by other warranted testimony.
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in knowledge,
and accordingly valiant.
 [Aside to PAROLLES]  Is she gone to the King?
Will she away to-night?
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses; and to-night,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
I think so.
Yes, I do know him well; and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.
                      Enter HELENA
I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepar'd I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled. This drives me to entreat you
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you;
For my respects are better than they seem,
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not. This to my mother.
                                           [Giving a letter]
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you; so
I leave you to your wisdom.
Come, come, no more of that.
Let that go.
My haste is very great. Farewell; hie home.
Well, what would you say?
What would you have?
I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.
Where are my other men, monsieur?
Farewell!                                        Exit HELENA
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
Away, and for our flight.
Sir, it is
A charge too heavy for my strength; but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To th' extreme edge of hazard.
This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file;
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.                   Exeunt
Do you think I am so far deceived in him?
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.
How now, monsieur! This drum sticks sorely in your
disposition.
Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success.
Some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it is not to
be recovered.
It might, but it is not now.
Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur. If you think
your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour
again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise,
and go on; I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit. If you
speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it and extend to
you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost
syllable of our worthiness.
But you must not now slumber in it.
May I be bold to acquaint his Grace you are gone about it?
I know th' art valiant; and, to the of thy soldiership,
will subscribe for thee. Farewell.
Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of this that
so seriously he does address himself unto?
Your brother, he shall go along with me.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
The lass I spoke of.
That's all the fault. I spoke with her but once,
And found her wondrous cold; but I sent to her,
By this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
Tokens and letters which she did re-send;
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature;
Will you go see her?
They told me that your name was Fontibell.
Titled goddess;
And worth it, with addition! But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden, but a monument;
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now, for you are cold and stern;
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.
So should you be.
No more o'that!
I prithee do not strive against my vows.
I was compell'd to her; but I love the
By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.
How have I sworn!
Change it, change it;
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy;
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.
I'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
To give it from me.
It is an honour 'longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors;
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose.
Here, take my ring;
My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
I have to-night dispatch'd sixteen businesses, a month's
length apiece; by an abstract of success: I have congied with the
Duke, done my adieu with his nearest; buried a wife, mourn'd for
her; writ to my lady mother I am returning; entertain'd my
convoy; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected many
nicer needs. The last was the greatest, but that I have not ended
yet.
I mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it
hereafter. But shall we have this dialogue between the Fool and
the Soldier? Come, bring forth this counterfeit module has
deceiv'd me like a double-meaning prophesier.
No matter; his heels have deserv'd it, in usurping his
spurs so long. How does he carry himself?
Nothing of me, has 'a?
A plague upon him! muffled! He can say nothing of me.
All's one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!
But I con him no thanks for't in the nature he delivers it.
What shall be done to him?
Nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though I know his
brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.
Our interpreter does it well.
Damnable both-sides rogue!
He shall be whipt through the army with this rhyme in's
forehead.
I could endure anything before but a cat, and now he's a
cat to me.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon him! For
me, he's more and more a cat.
A pox on him! he's a cat still.
Good morrow, noble Captain.
My high-repented blames,
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.
Admiringly, my liege. At first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold herald of my tongue;
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warp'd the line of every other favour,
Scorn'd a fair colour or express'd it stol'n,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came
That she whom all men prais'd, and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have lov'd, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.
Hers it was not.
My gracious sovereign,
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.
You are deceiv'd, my lord; she never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name
Of her that threw it. Noble she was, and thought
I stood engag'd; but when I had subscrib'd
To mine own fortune, and inform'd her fully
I could not answer in that course of honour
As she had made the overture, she ceas'd,
In heavy satisfaction, and would never
Receive the ring again.
She never saw it.
If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where she yet never was.                       Exit, guarded
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?
She's none of mine, my lord.
My lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
Whom sometime I have laugh'd with. Let your Highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
Than for to think that I would sink it here.
She's impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp.
What of him?
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o' th' world tax'd and debauch'd,
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter
That will speak anything?
I think she has. Certain it is I lik'd her,
And boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance, and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy; and, in fine,
Her infinite cunning with her modern grace
Subdu'd me to her rate. She got the ring;
And I had that which any inferior might
At market-price have bought.
I have it not.
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
Both, both; o, pardon!
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
