'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.
No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, though many of
the rich are damn'd; but if I may have your ladyship's good will
to go to the world, Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.
I do beg your good will in this case.
In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no heritage; and I
think I shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue o'
my body; for they say bames are blessings.
My poor body, madam, requires it. I am driven on by the
flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such as they are.
I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and all flesh
and blood are; and, indeed, I do marry that I may repent.
I am out o' friends, madam, and I hope to have friends for
my wife's sake.
Y'are shallow, madam-in great friends; for the knaves come
to do that for me which I am aweary of. He that ears my land
spares my team, and gives me leave to in the crop. If I be his
cuckold, he's my drudge. He that comforts my wife is the
cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh and
blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my flesh and blood
is my friend; ergo, he that kisses my wife is my friend. If men
could be contented to be what they are, there were no fear in
marriage; for young Charbon the puritan and old Poysam the
papist, howsome'er their hearts are sever'd in religion, their
heads are both one; they may jowl horns together like any deer
i' th' herd.
A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next way:
          For I the ballad will repeat,
            Which men full true shall find:
          Your marriage comes by destiny,
            Your cuckoo sings by kind.
 [Sings]
           'Was this fair face the cause' quoth she
             'Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
           Fond done, done fond,
             Was this King Priam's joy?'
           With that she sighed as she stood,
           With that she sighed as she stood,
             And gave this sentence then:
           'Among nine bad if one be good,
           Among nine bad if one be good,
             There's yet one good in ten.'
One good woman in ten, madam, which is a purifying o' th'
song. Would God would serve the world so all the year! We'd find
no fault with the tithe-woman, if I were the parson. One in ten,
quoth 'a! An we might have a good woman born before every blazing
star, or at an earthquake, 'twould mend the lottery well: a man
may draw his heart out ere 'a pluck one.
That man should be at woman's command, and yet no hurt done!
Though honesty be no puritan, yet it will do no hurt; it will
wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart.
I am going, forsooth. The business is for Helen to come hither.
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. I know my
business is but to the court.
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he may
easily put it off at court. He that cannot make a leg, put off's
cap, kiss his hand, and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip,
nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for
the court; but for me, I have an answer will serve all men.
It is like a barber's chair, that fits all buttocks-the pin
buttock, the quatch buttock, the brawn buttock, or any buttock.
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as your
French crown for your taffety punk, as Tib's rush for Tom's
forefinger, as a pancake for Shrove Tuesday, a morris for Mayday,
as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding
quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the friar's
mouth; nay, as the pudding to his skin.
From below your duke to beneath your constable, it will fit
any question.
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned should
speak truth of it. Here it is, and all that belongs to't. Ask me
if I am a courtier: it shall do you no harm to learn.
O Lord, sir!-There's a simple putting off. More, more, a
hundred of them.
O Lord, sir!-Thick, thick; spare not me.
O Lord, sir!-Nay, put me to't, I warrant you.
O Lord, sir!-Spare not me.
I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord, sir!' I see
thing's may serve long, but not serve ever.
O Lord, sir!-Why, there't serves well again.
Not much commendation to them?
Most fruitfully; I am there before my legs.
She is not well, but yet she has her health; she's very
merry, but yet she is not well. But thanks be given, she's very
well, and wants nothing i' th' world; but yet she is not well.
Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.
One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send her quickly!
The other, that she's in earth, from whence God send her quickly!
                    Enter PAROLLES
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money, I would she
did as you say.
Marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's tongue shakes
out his master's undoing. To say nothing, to do nothing, to know
nothing, and to have nothing, is to be a great part of your
title, which is within a very little of nothing.
You should have said, sir, 'Before a knave th'art a knave';
that's 'Before me th'art a knave.' This had been truth, sir.
Did you find me in yourself, sir, or were you taught to find
me? The search, sir, was profitable; and much fool may you find
in you, even to the world's pleasure and the increase of
laughter.
By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very melancholy
man.
Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and
sing; ask questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing. I know a
man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a
song.
I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court. Our old ling
and our Isbels o' th' country are nothing like your old ling and
your Isbels o' th' court. The brains of my Cupid's knock'd out;
and I begin to love, as an old man loves money, with no stomach.
E'en that you have there.                          Exit
O madam, yonder is heavy news within between two soldiers
and my young lady.
Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort; your
son will not be kill'd so soon as I thought he would.
So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does the
danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss of men, though it be
the getting of children. Here they come will tell you more. For my
part, I only hear your son was run away.                Exit
          Enter HELENA and the two FRENCH GENTLEMEN
Indeed, sir, she was the sweet-marjoram of the sallet, or,
rather, the herb of grace.
I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir; I have not much skill in
grass.
A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's.
I would cozen the man of his wife, and do his service.
And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.
At your service.
Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as great a
prince as you are.
Faith, sir, 'a has an English name; but his fisnomy is more
hotter in France than there.
The Black Prince, sir; alias, the Prince of Darkness; alias,
the devil.
I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire;
and the master I speak of ever keeps a good fire. But, sure, he
is the prince of the world; let his nobility remain in's court. I
am for the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be too
little for pomp to enter. Some that humble themselves may; but
the many will be too chill and tender: and they'll be for the
flow'ry way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be jades'
tricks, which are their own right by the law of nature.
O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a patch of velvet
on's face; whether there be a scar under 't or no, the velvet
knows; but 'tis a goodly patch of velvet. His left cheek is a
cheek of two pile and a half, but his right cheek is worn bare.
But it is your carbonado'd face.
Faith, there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine hats, and
most courteous feathers, which bow the head and nod at every man.
                                                      Exeunt
Truly, Fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it smell
so strongly as thou speak'st of. I will henceforth eat no fish
of Fortune's butt'ring. Prithee, allow the wind.
Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop my nose; or
against any man's metaphor. Prithee, get thee further.
Foh! prithee stand away. A paper from Fortune's close-stool
to give to a nobleman! Look here he comes himself.
                       Enter LAFEU
Here is a pur of Fortune's, sir, or of Fortune's cat, but not
a musk-cat, that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond of her
displeasure, and, as he says, is muddied withal. Pray you, sir,
use the carp as you may; for he looks like a poor, decayed,
ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I do pity his distress
in my similes of comfort, and leave him to your lordship.
