Nay, come; for if they do approach the city we shall lose
all the sight.
It is reported that he has taken their great'st commander;
and that with his own hand he slew the Duke's brother.  [Tucket]
We have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary way. Hark! you
may know by their trumpets.
I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a
gentleman his companion.
I hope so. Look, here comes a pilgrim. I know she will lie
at my house: thither they send one another. I'll question her.
God save you, pilgrim! Whither are bound?
At the Saint Francis here, beside the port.
Ay, marry, is't. Hark you! They come this way.
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodg'd;
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.
If you shall please so, pilgrim.
You came, I think, from France?
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.
I sweet, good creature, wheresoe'er she is
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do her
A shrewd turn, if she pleas'd.
He does, indeed;
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
But she is arm'd for him, and keeps her guard
In honestest defence.
Enter, with drum and colours, BERTRAM, PAROLLES, and the
                      whole ARMY
So, now they come.
That is Antonio, the Duke's eldest son;
That, Escalus.
Marry, hang you!
The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host. Of enjoin'd penitents
There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.
Though my estate be fall'n, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses;
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.
I should believe you;
For you have show'd me that which well approves
Y'are great in fortune.
Now I see
The bottom of your purpose.
I have yielded.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts, and songs compos'd
To her unworthiness. It nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists
As if his life lay on 't.
Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.
Lord, how we lose our pains!
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.
