It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.
You're loved, sir;
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
Health, at your bidding, serve your Majesty!
I am your accessary; and so farewell.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
No better, if you please.
Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guess'd.
Nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his way.
On my life, my lord, a bubble.
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge,
without any malice, but to speak of him as my kinsman, he's a
most notable coward, an infinite and endless liar, an hourly
promise-breaker, the owner of no one good quality worthy your
lordship's entertainment.
I with a troop of Florentines will suddenly surprise
him; such I will have whom I am sure he knows not from the enemy.
We will bind and hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no other
but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries when
we bring him to our own tents. Be but your lordship present at
his examination; if he do not, for the promise of his life and in
the highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
deliver all the intelligence in his power against you, and that
with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my
judgment in anything.
O, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour of
his design; let him fetch off his drum in any hand.
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a strange
fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems to undertake this
business, which he knows is not to be done; damns himself to do,
and dares better be damn'd than to do 't.
None in the world; but return with an invention, and
clap upon you two or three probable lies. But we have almost
emboss'd him. You shall see his fall to-night; for indeed he is
not for your lordship's respect.
I must go look my twigs; he shall be caught.
As't please your lordship. I'll leave you.   Exit
He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.
When you sally upon him, speak what terrible language you will;
though you understand it not yourselves, no matter; for we must
not seem to understand him, unless some one among us, whom we
must produce for an interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him? Knows he not thy voice?
But what linsey-woolsey has thou to speak to us again?
He must think us some band of strangers i' th'
adversary's entertainment. Now he hath a smack of all
neighbouring languages, therefore we must every one be a man of
his own fancy; not to know what we speak one to another, so we
seem to know, is to know straight our purpose: choughs' language,
gabble enough, and good enough. As for you, interpreter, you must
seem very politic. But couch, ho! here he comes; to beguile two
hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies he forges.
                     Enter PAROLLES
This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue was
guilty of.
Is it possible he should know what he is, and be that
he is?
We cannot afford you so.
'Twould not do.
Hardly serve.
How deep?
Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.
You shall hear one anon.          [Alarum within]
Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
Oscorbidulchos volivorco.
Go, tell the Count Rousillon and my brother
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them.
'A will betray us all unto ourselves-
Inform on that.
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely lock'd.
                                                      Exeunt
You have not given him his mother's letter?
He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off
so good a wife and so sweet a lady.
When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am the grave
of it.
Now, God delay our rebellion! As we are ourselves,
what things are we!
Is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters of our
unlawful intents? We shall not then have his company to-night?
That approaches apace. I would gladly have him see his
company anatomiz'd, that he might take a measure of his own
judgments, wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.
In the meantime, what hear you of these wars?
Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.
I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether
of his counsel.
Sir, his wife, some two months since, fled from his
house. Her pretence is a pilgrimage to Saint Jaques le Grand;
which holy undertaking with most austere sanctimony she
accomplish'd; and, there residing, the tenderness of her nature
became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan of her last
breath, and now she sings in heaven.
The stronger part of it by her own letters, which
makes her story true even to the point of her death. Her death
itself, which could not be her office to say is come, was
faithfully confirm'd by the rector of the place.
Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from
point, to the full arming of the verity.
How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our
losses!
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill
together. Our virtues would be proud if our faults whipt them
not; and our crimes would despair if they were not cherish'd by
our virtues.
                  Enter a MESSENGER
How now? Where's your master?
They shall be no more than needful there, if they were
more than they can commend.
If the business be of any difficulty and this morning
your departure hence, it requires haste of your lordship.
Bring him forth.  [Exeunt SOLDIERS]  Has sat i' th'
stocks all night, poor gallant knave.
I have told your lordship already the stocks carry
him. But to answer you as you would be understood: he weeps like
a wench that had shed her milk; he hath confess'd himself to
Morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time of his
remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i' th'
stocks. And what think you he hath confess'd?
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his
face; if your lordship be in't, as I believe you are, you must
have the patience to hear it.
               Enter PAROLLES guarded, and
              FIRST SOLDIER as interpreter
Hush, hush! Hoodman comes. Portotartarossa.
Boblibindo chicurmurco.
Y'are deceiv'd, my lord; this is Monsieur Parolles,
the gallant militarist-that was his own phrase-that had the whole
theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in the
chape of his dagger.
He's very near the truth in this.
Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him my
condition, and what credit I have with the Duke.
Nay, look not so upon me; we shall hear of your
lordship anon.
Excellently.
I begin to love him for this.
He hath out-villain'd villainy so far that the rarity
redeems him.
God save you, noble Captain.
Good Captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet
you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count Rousillon? An I were not
a very coward I'd compel it of you; but fare you well.
                                    Exeunt BERTRAM and LORDS
