Come on; since the youth will not be entreated, his own
peril on his forwardness.
How now, daughter and cousin! Are you crept hither to
see the wrestling?
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you,
there is such odds in the man. In pity of the challenger's youth
I would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated. Speak to
him, ladies; see if you can move him.
Do so; I'll not be by.
                                 [DUKE FREDERICK goes apart]
You shall try but one fall.
No more, no more.
How dost thou, Charles?
Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?
I would thou hadst been son to some man else.
The world esteem'd thy father honourable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleas'd me with this deed,
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well; thou art a gallant youth;
I would thou hadst told me of another father.
                             Exeunt DUKE, train, and LE BEAU
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our court.
You, cousin.
Within these ten days if that thou beest found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.
Thus do all traitors;
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Thou art thy father's daughter; there's enough.
Ay, Celia; we stay'd her for your sake,
Else had she with her father rang'd along.
She is too subtle for thee; and her smoothness,
Her very silence and her patience,
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name;
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have pass'd upon her; she is banish'd.
You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself.
If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
                                       Exeunt DUKE and LORDS
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be; some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me;
I'll make him find him. Do this suddenly;
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.                Exeunt
Not see him since! Sir, sir, that cannot be.
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother wheresoe'er he is;
Seek him with candle; bring him dead or living
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
Of what we think against thee.
More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors;
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands.
Do this expediently, and turn him going.              Exeunt
