I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that I
love thee. If my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy
uncle, the Duke my father, so thou hadst been still with me, I
could have taught my love to take thy father for mine; so wouldst
thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously temper'd
as mine is to thee.
You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like to
have; and, truly, when he dies thou shalt be his heir; for what
he hath taken away from thy father perforce, I will render thee
again in affection. By mine honour, I will; and when I break that
oath, let me turn monster; therefore, my sweet Rose, my dear
Rose, be merry.
Marry, I prithee, do, to make sport withal; but love no man
in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety
of a pure blush thou mayst in honour come off again.
Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her
wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.
'Tis true; for those that she makes fair she scarce makes
honest; and those that she makes honest she makes very
ill-favouredly.
No; when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by
Fortune fall into the fire? Though Nature hath given us wit to
flout at Fortune, hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off
the argument?
Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but
Nature's, who perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of
such goddesses, and hath sent this natural for our whetstone; for
always the dullness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. How
now, wit! Whither wander you?
Were you made the messenger?
How prove you that, in the great heap of your knowledge?
By our beards, if we had them, thou art.
Prithee, who is't that thou mean'st?
My father's love is enough to honour him. Enough, speak no
more of him; you'll be whipt for taxation one of these days.
By my troth, thou sayest true; for since the little wit that
fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have
makes a great show. Here comes Monsieur Le Beau.
                       Enter LE BEAU
Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.
All the better; we shall be the more marketable. Bon jour,
Monsieur Le Beau. What's the news?
Sport! of what colour?
Well said; that was laid on with a trowel.
Well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.
I could match this beginning with an old tale.
Or I, I promise thee.
Yonder, sure, they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.
       Flourish. Enter DUKE FREDERICK, LORDS, ORLANDO,
                 CHARLES, and ATTENDANTS
Alas, he is too young; yet he looks successfully.
Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years.
You have seen cruel proof of this man's strength; if you saw
yourself with your eyes, or knew yourself with your judgment, the
fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal
enterprise. We pray you, for your own sake, to embrace your own
safety and give over this attempt.
And mine to eke out hers.
Your heart's desires be with you!
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the
leg.                                          [They wrestle]
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should
down.
                                  [CHARLES is thrown. Shout]
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
Gentle cousin,
Let us go thank him, and encourage him;
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart. Sir, you have well deserv'd;
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly as you have exceeded all promise,
Your mistress shall be happy.
Ay. Fare you well, fair gentleman.
Will you go, coz?
Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy!
Not a word?
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs;
throw some of them at me; come, lame me with reasons.
But is all this for your father?
They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday
foolery; if we walk not in the trodden paths, our very petticoats
will catch them.
Hem them away.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
O, a good wish upon you! You will try in time, in despite of
a fall. But, turning these jests out of service, let us talk in
good earnest. Is it possible, on such a sudden, you should fall
into so strong a liking with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly?
By this kind of chase I should hate him, for my father hated his
father dearly; yet I hate not Orlando.
Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?
                Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with LORDS
With his eyes full of anger.
Dear sovereign, hear me speak.
I did not then entreat to have her stay;
It was your pleasure, and your own remorse;
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why so am I: we still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together;
And wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
Pronounce that sentence, then, on me, my liege;
I cannot live out of her company.
O my poor Rosalind! Whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee be not thou more griev'd than I am.
Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee be cheerful. Know'st thou not the Duke
Hath banish'd me, his daughter?
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks, then, the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sund'red? Shall we part, sweet girl?
No; let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us;
And do not seek to take your charge upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself, and leave me out;
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face;
The like do you; so shall we pass along,
And never stir assailants.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me;
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away,
And get our jewels and our wealth together;
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment.                    Exeunt
I pray you bear with me; I cannot go no further.
I pray you, one of you question yond man
If he for gold will give us any food;
I faint almost to death.
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place,
And willingly could waste my time in it.
  'Why should this a desert be?
         For it is unpeopled? No;
       Tongues I'll hang on every tree
         That shall civil sayings show.
       Some, how brief the life of man
         Runs his erring pilgrimage,
       That the streching of a span
         Buckles in his sum of age;
       Some, of violated vows
         'Twixt the souls of friend and friend;
       But upon the fairest boughs,
         Or at every sentence end,
       Will I Rosalinda write,
         Teaching all that read to know
       The quintessence of every sprite
         Heaven would in little show.
       Therefore heaven Nature charg'd
         That one body should be fill'd
       With all graces wide-enlarg'd.
         Nature presently distill'd
       Helen's cheek, but not her heart,
         Cleopatra's majesty,
       Atalanta's better part,
         Sad Lucretia's modesty.
       Thus Rosalinde of many parts
         By heavenly synod was devis'd,
       Of many faces, eyes, and hearts,
         To have the touches dearest priz'd.
       Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
       And I to live and die her slave.'
How now! Back, friends; shepherd, go off a little; go with
him, sirrah.
Didst thou hear these verses?
That's no matter; the feet might bear the verses.
But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be
hang'd and carved upon these trees?
Trow you who hath done this?
And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
Change you colour?
O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but
mountains may be remov'd with earthquakes, and so encounter.
Is it possible?
O wonderful, wonderful, most wonderful wonderful, and yet
again wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!
So you may put a man in your belly.
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
It is young Orlando, that tripp'd up the wrestler's heels
and your heart both in an instant.
I' faith, coz, 'tis he.
Orlando.
You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first; 'tis a word too
great for any mouth of this age's size. To say ay and no to these
particulars is more than to answer in a catechism.
It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
propositions of a lover; but take a taste of my finding him, and
relish it with good observance. I found him under a tree, like a
dropp'd acorn.
Give me audience, good madam.
There lay he, stretch'd along like a wounded knight.
Cry 'Holla' to thy tongue, I prithee; it curvets
unseasonably. He was furnish'd like a hunter.
I would sing my song without a burden; thou bring'st me out
of tune.
You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?
               Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES
Do, I prithee; but yet have the grace to consider that tears
do not become a man.
As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep.
Something browner than Judas's.
Marry, his kisses are Judas's own children.
An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.
He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A nun of
winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously; the very ice of
chastity is in them.
Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
Yes; I think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer; but
for his verity in love, I do think him as concave as covered
goblet or a worm-eaten nut.
Yes, when he is in; but I think he is not in.
'Was' is not 'is'; besides, the oath of a lover is no
stronger than the word of a tapster; they are both the confirmer
of false reckonings. He attends here in the forest on the Duke,
your father.
O, that's a brave man! He writes brave verses, speaks brave
words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite
traverse, athwart the heart of his lover; as a puny tilter, that
spurs his horse but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble
goose. But all's brave that youth mounts and folly guides. Who
comes here?
                     Enter CORIN
Well, and what of him?
It pleases him to call you so; but he hath a Rosalind of a
better leer than you.
I cannot say the words.
Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?
You have simply misus'd our sex in your love-prate. We must
have your doublet and hose pluck'd over your head, and show the
world what the bird hath done to her own nest.
Or rather, bottomless; that as fast as you pour affection
in, it runs out.
And I'll sleep.                                  Exeunt
    Enter JAQUES and LORDS, in the habit of foresters
I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he hath
ta'en his bow and arrows, and is gone forth- to sleep. Look, who
comes here.
                  Enter SILVIUS
Alas, poor shepherd!
West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom.
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself;
There's none within.
It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.
I pray you, tell it.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;
And he did render him the most unnatural
That liv'd amongst men.
Are you his brother?
Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!
There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!
We'll lead you thither.
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
Come, you look paler and paler; pray you draw homewards.
Good sir, go with us.
