As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed
me by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou say'st,
charged my brother, on his blessing, to breed me well; and there
begins my sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
report speaks goldenly of his profit. For my part, he keeps me
rustically at home, or, to speak more properly, stays me here at
home unkept; for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my
birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are
bred better; for, besides that they are fair with their feeding,
they are taught their manage, and to that end riders dearly
hir'd; but I, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth; for
the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him
as I. Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the
something that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from
me. He lets me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a
brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my
education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me; and the spirit of
my father, which I think is within me, begins to mutiny against
this servitude. I will no longer endure it, though yet I know no
wise remedy how to avoid it.
                       Enter OLIVER
Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me
up.                                           [ADAM retires]
Nothing; I am not taught to make any thing.
Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a
poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? What
prodigal portion have I spent that I should come to such penury?
O, sir, very well; here in your orchard.
Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know you are
my eldest brother; and in the gentle condition of blood, you
should so know me. The courtesy of nations allows you my better
in that you are the first-born; but the same tradition takes not
away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us. I have as
much of my father in me as you, albeit I confess your coming
before me is nearer to his reverence.
Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.
I am no villain; I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de
Boys. He was my father; and he is thrice a villain that says such
a father begot villains. Wert thou not my brother, I would not
take this hand from thy throat till this other had pull'd out thy
tongue for saying so. Thou has rail'd on thyself.
I will not, till I please; you shall hear me. My father
charg'd you in his will to give me good education: you have
train'd me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all
gentleman-like qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
me, and I will no longer endure it; therefore allow me such
exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor
allottery my father left me by testament; with that I will go buy
my fortunes.
I no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
I attend them with all respect and duty.
No, fair Princess; he is the general challenger. I come
but in, as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.
I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts,
wherein I confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent
ladies any thing. But let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go
with me to my trial; wherein if I be foil'd there is but one
sham'd that was never gracious; if kill'd, but one dead that is
willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none
to lament me; the world no injury, for in it I have nothing; only
in the world I fill up a place, which may be better supplied when
I have made it empty.
Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.
You mean to mock me after; you should not have mock'd me
before; but come your ways.
Yes, I beseech your Grace; I am not yet well breath'd.
Orlando, my liege; the youngest son of Sir Rowland de
Boys.
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
His youngest son- and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.
Can I not say 'I thank you'? My better parts
Are all thrown down; and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urg'd conference.
O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.
                  Re-enter LE BEAU
I thank you, sir; and pray you tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke
That here was at the wrestling?
I rest much bounden to you; fare you well.
                                                Exit LE BEAU
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother;
From tyrant Duke unto a tyrant brother.
But heavenly Rosalind!                                  Exit
Who's there?
Why, what's the matter?
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,
Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do;
Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up
Even with the having; it is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
But come thy ways, we'll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent
We'll light upon some settled low content.
Why, how now, Adam! No greater heart in thee? Live a
little; comfort a little; cheer thyself a little. If this uncouth
forest yield anything savage, I will either be food for it or
bring it for food to thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy
powers. For my sake be comfortable; hold death awhile at the
arm's end. I will here be with the presently; and if I bring thee
not something to eat, I will give thee leave to die; but if thou
diest before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well said!
thou look'st cheerly; and I'll be with thee quickly. Yet thou
liest in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some shelter;
and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner, if there live
anything in this desert. Cheerly, good Adam!          Exeunt
Forbear, and eat no more.
Nor shalt not, till necessity be serv'd.
You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility; yet arn I inland bred,
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say;
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.
I almost die for food, and let me have it.
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you;
I thought that all things had been savage here,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time;
If ever you have look'd on better days,
If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church,
If ever sat at any good man's feast,
If ever from your eyelids wip'd a tear,
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be;
In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
Then but forbear your food a little while,
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn,
And give it food. There is an old poor man
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limp'd in pure love; till he be first suffic'd,
Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
I thank ye; and be blest for your good comfort!
I thank you most for him.
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love;
And thou, thrice-crowned Queen of Night, survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books,
And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
That every eye which in this forest looks
Shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.
Run, run, Orlando; carve on every tree,
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.             Exit
                 Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE
And so had I; but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you too
for your society.
I do desire we may be better strangers.
I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them
ill-favouredly.
Yes, just.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
christen'd.
Just as high as my heart.
Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence
you have studied your questions.
I will chide no breather in the world but myself, against
whom I know most faults.
'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue. I am
weary of you.
He is drown'd in the brook; look but in, and you shall see
him.
Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.
I am glad of your departure; adieu, good Monsieur
Melancholy.
                                                 Exit JAQUES
Very well; what would you?
You should ask me what time o' day; there's no clock in
the forest.
And why not the swift foot of Time? Had not that been as
proper?
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
Who ambles Time withal?
Who doth he gallop withal?
Who stays it still withal?
Where dwell you, pretty youth?
Are you native of this place?
Your accent is something finer than you could purchase in
so removed a dwelling.
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid
to the charge of women?
I prithee recount some of them.
I am he that is so love-shak'd; I pray you tell me your
remedy.
What were his marks?
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.
I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I
am that he, that unfortunate he.
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
Did you ever cure any so?
I would not be cured, youth.
Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me where it is.
With all my heart, good youth.
Good day, and happiness, dear Rosalind!
My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.
Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
Of a snail!
What's that?
Virtue is no horn-maker; and my Rosalind is virtuous.
I would kiss before I spoke.
How if the kiss be denied?
Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?
What, of my suit?
I take some joy to say you are, because I would be talking
of her.
Then, in mine own person, I die.
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind; for, I
protest, her frown might kill me.
Then love me, Rosalind.
And wilt thou have me?
What sayest thou?
I hope so.
Pray thee, marry us.
I will.
Why, now; as fast as she can marry us.
I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
So do all thoughts; they are wing'd.
For ever and a day.
But will my Rosalind do so?
O, but she is wise.
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say 'Wit,
whither wilt?' ROSALIND. Nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your
wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.
And what wit could wit have to excuse that?
For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
I must attend the Duke at dinner; by two o'clock I will be
with thee again.
Ay, sweet Rosalind.
With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
Rosalind; so, adieu.
Is't possible that on so little acquaintance you should
like her? that but seeing you should love her? and loving woo?
and, wooing, she should grant? and will you persever to enjoy
her?
You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow.
Thither will I invite the Duke and all's contented followers. Go
you and prepare Aliena; for, look you, here comes my Rosalind.
                    Enter ROSALIND
It is my arm.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
Ay, and greater wonders than that.
They shall be married to-morrow; and I will bid the Duke
to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it is to look into
happiness through another man's eyes! By so much the more shall I
to-morrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I
shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
I can live no longer by thinking.
Speak'st thou in sober meanings?
And I for Rosalind.
And I for Rosalind.
And so am I for Rosalind.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Nor I.                                         Exeunt
I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not:
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
           Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,
And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.
                Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
