Hail, heaven!
What should we speak of
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse.
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing;
We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,
Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat.
Our valour is to chase what flies; our cage
We make a choir, as doth the prison'd bird,
And sing our bondage freely.
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,
As 'tis no better reckon'd but of those
Who worship dirty gods.
I'll make't my comfort
He is a man. I'll love him as my brother;
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
After long absence, such is yours. Most welcome!
Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends.
Or I, whate'er it be,
What pain it cost, what danger! Gods!
The night to th' owl and morn to th' lark less welcome.
I pray draw near.                            Exeunt
[To IMOGEN] Brother, stay here.
Are we not brothers?
If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me
In my good brother's fault. I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say
Love's reason's without reason. The bier at door,
And a demand who is't shall die, I'd say
'My father, not this youth.'
Brother, farewell.
Your health. [To BELARIUS] So please you, sir.
Thus did he answer me; yet said hereafter
I might know more.
We'll not be long away.
How angel-like he sings!
Nobly he yokes
A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh
Was that it was for not being such a smile;
The smile mocking the sigh that it would fly
From so divine a temple to commix
With winds that sailors rail at.
Grow patience!
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
His perishing root with the increasing vine!
None in the world; you did mistake him, sure.
In this place we left them.
I wish my brother make good time with him,
You say he is so fell.
Let ordinance
Come as the gods foresay it. Howsoe'er,
My brother hath done well.
Would I had done't,
So the revenge alone pursu'd me! Polydore,
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou hast robb'd me of this deed. I would revenges,
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through,
And put us to our answer.
Poor sick Fidele!
I'll willingly to him; to gain his colour
I'd let a parish of such Cloten's blood,
And praise myself for charity.                          Exit
The bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipp'd from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turn'd my leaping time into a crutch,
Than have seen this.
Stark, as you see;
Thus smiling, as some fly had tickled slumber,
Not as death's dart, being laugh'd at; his right cheek
Reposing on a cushion.
O' th' floor;
His arms thus leagu'd. I thought he slept, and put
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answer'd my steps too loud.
With fairest flowers,
Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,
I'll sweeten thy sad grave. Thou shalt not lack
The flower that's like thy face, pale primrose; nor
The azur'd hare-bell, like thy veins; no, nor
The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander,
Out-sweet'ned not thy breath. The ruddock would,
With charitable bill- O bill, sore shaming
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
Without a monument!- bring thee all this;
Yea, and furr'd moss besides, when flow'rs are none,
To winter-ground thy corse-
Say, where shall's lay him?
Be't so;
And let us, Polydore, though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to th' ground,
As once to our mother; use like note and words,
Save that Euriphile must be Fidele.
We'll speak it, then.
If you'll go fetch him,
We'll say our song the whilst. Brother, begin.
                                               Exit BELARIUS
'Tis true.
So. Begin.
                  SONG
Fear no more the frown o' th' great;
           Thou art past the tyrant's stroke.
         Care no more to clothe and eat;
           To thee the reed is as the oak.
         The sceptre, learning, physic, must
         All follow this and come to dust.
  Nor th' all-dreaded thunder-stone;
  Thou hast finish'd joy and moan.
Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
Nothing ill come near thee!
What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it
From action and adventure?
It is not likely
That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quarter'd fires, have both their eyes
And ears so cloy'd importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.
By this sun that shines,
I'll thither. What thing is't that I never
Did see man die! scarce ever look'd on blood
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
Never bestrid a horse, save one that had
A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel
Nor iron on his heel! I am asham'd
To look upon the holy sun, to have
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.
So say I. Amen.
One sand another
Not more resembles- that sweet rosy lad
Who died and was Fidele. What think you?
In that he spake too far.
Your danger's ours.
Ay, my good lord.
You holp us, sir,
As you did mean indeed to be our brother;
Joy'd are we that you are.
