O, God save ye!
Ev'n to the Hall, to hear what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
Were you there?
Pray, speak what has happen'd.
Is he found guilty?
I am sorry for't.
But, pray, how pass'd it?
That was he
That fed him with his prophecies?
After all this, how did he bear him-self
I do not think he fears death.
Certainly
The Cardinal is the end of this.
That trick of state
Was a deep envious one.
All the commons
Hate him perniciously, and, o' my conscience,
Wish him ten fathom deep: this Duke as much
They love and dote on; call him bounteous Buckingham,
The mirror of all courtesy-
  Enter BUCKINGHAM from his arraignment, tip-staves
  before him; the axe with the edge towards him; halberds
  on each side; accompanied with SIR THOMAS
  LOVELL, SIR NICHOLAS VAUX, SIR WILLIAM SANDYS,
  and common people, etc.
Let's stand close, and behold him.
If the Duke be guiltless,
'Tis full of woe; yet I can give you inkling
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater than this.
This secret is so weighty, 'twill require
A strong faith to conceal it.
I am confident.
You shall, sir. Did you not of late days hear
A buzzing of a separation
Between the King and Katharine?
But that slander, sir,
Is found a truth now; for it grows again
Fresher than e'er it was, and held for certain
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal
Or some about him near have, out of malice
To the good Queen, possess'd him with a scruple
That will undo her. To confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arriv'd and lately;
As all think, for this business.
I think you have hit the mark; but is't
    not cruel
That she should feel the smart of this? The Cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.
So are you.
'Tis all my business. At our last encounter
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.
'Tis well. The citizens,
I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds-
As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward-
In celebration of this day with shows,
Pageants, and sights of honour.
May I be bold to ask what that contains,
That paper in your hand?
I thank you, sir; had I not known
  those customs,
I should have been beholding to your paper.
But, I beseech you, what's become of Katharine,
The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?
Alas, good lady!                       [Trumpets]
The trumpets sound. Stand close, the Queen is coming.
          THE ORDER OF THE CORONATION.
1. A lively flourish of trumpets.
2. Then two JUDGES.
3. LORD CHANCELLOR, with purse and mace before him.
4. CHORISTERS singing.                                    [Music]
5. MAYOR OF LONDON, bearing the mace. Then GARTER, in
   his coat of arms, and on his head he wore a gilt copper
   crown.
6. MARQUIS DORSET, bearing a sceptre of gold, on his head a
   demi-coronal of gold. With him, the EARL OF SURREY,
   bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned with an
   earl's coronet. Collars of Esses.
7. DUKE OF SUFFOLK, in his robe of estate, his coronet on
   his head, bearing a long white wand, as High Steward.
   With him, the DUKE OF NORFOLK, with the rod of
   marshalship, a coronet on his head. Collars of Esses.
8. A canopy borne by four of the CINQUE-PORTS; under it
   the QUEEN in her robe; in her hair richly adorned with
   pearl, crowned. On each side her, the BISHOPS OF LONDON
   and WINCHESTER.
9. The old DUCHESS OF NORFOLK, in a coronal of gold
   wrought with flowers, bearing the QUEEN'S train.
   without flowers.
         Exeunt, first passing over the stage in order and state,
                            and then a great flourish of trumpets
A royal train, believe me. These know.
Who's that that bears the sceptre?
A bold brave gentleman. That should be
The Duke of Suffolk?
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
 [Looking on the QUEEN]  Heaven
  bless thee!
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on.
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel;
Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
And more and richer, when he strains that lady;
I cannot blame his conscience.
Those men are happy; and so are all
  are near her.
I take it she that carries up the train
Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed,
And sometimes falling ones.
You saw
The ceremony?
Good sir, speak it to us.
But what follow'd?
What two reverend bishops
Were those that went on each side of the Queen?
He of Winchester
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's,
The virtuous Cranmer.
Who may that be, I pray you?
He will deserve more.
