How does your Grace?
Yes, madam; but I think your Grace,
Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.
Well, the voice goes, madam;
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at York and brought him forward,
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
He could not sit his mule.
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
Lodg'd in the abbey; where the reverend abbot,
With all his covent, honourably receiv'd him;
To whom he gave these words: 'O father Abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of state,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye;
Give him a little earth for charity!'
So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness
Pursu'd him still And three nights after this,
About the hour of eight-which he himself
Foretold should be his last-full of repentance,
Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,
He gave his honours to the world again,
His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.
Noble madam,
Men's evil manners live in brass: their virtues
We write in water. May it please your Highness
To hear me speak his good now?
This Cardinal,
Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly
Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle.
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one;
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading;
Lofty and sour to them that lov'd him not,
But to those men that sought him sweet as summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting-
Which was a sin-yet in bestowing, madam,
He was most princely: ever witness for him
Those twins of learning that he rais'd in you,
Ipswich and Oxford! One of which fell with him,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous,
So excellent in art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.
His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him;
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the blessedness of being little.
And, to add greater honours to his age
Than man could give him, he died fearing God.
She is asleep. Good wench, let's sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.
             THE VISION.
  Enter, solemnly tripping one after another, six
  PERSONAGES clad in white robes, wearing on their
  heads garlands of bays, and golden vizards on their
  faces; branches of bays or palm in their hands. They
  first congee unto her, then dance; and, at certain
  changes, the first two hold a spare garland over her
  head, at which the other four make reverent curtsies.
  Then the two that held the garland deliver the
  same to the other next two, who observe the same
  order in their changes, and holding the garland over
  her head; which done, they deliver the same garland
  to the last two, who likewise observe the same order;
  at which, as it were by inspiration, she makes
  in her sleep signs of rejoicing, and holdeth up her
  hands to heaven. And so in their dancing vanish,
  carrying the garland with them. The music continues
Madam, we are here.
None, madam.
I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
Possess your fancy.
She is going, wench. Pray, pray.
You are to blame,
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
To use so rude behaviour. Go to, kneel.
