Madam, his Majesty doth can for you,
And for your Grace, and you, my gracious lords.
He for his father's sake so loves the Prince
That he will not be won to aught against him.
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
You shall, my lord.
Many good morrows to my noble lord!
It is a reeling world indeed, my lord;
And I believe will never stand upright
Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.
Ay, my good lord.
Ay, on my life; and hopes to find you forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof;
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the Queen, must die at Pomfret.
God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,
When men are unprepar'd and look not for it.
The Princes both make high account of you-
[Aside]  For they account his head upon the bridge.
He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,
To visit him to-morrow or next day.
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation;
And in no worldly suits would he be mov'd,
To draw him from his holy exercise.
I'll signify so much unto him straight.          Exit
My lord,
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to come to him.
His Grace not being warn'd thereof before,
He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!
Call him again, sweet Prince, accept their suit.
If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
 [Aside to another]  The King is angry; see, he
gnaws his lip.
Here, my good lord.
I will my lord, with all convenient haste.
First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,
What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
I go.                                            Exit
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken-
That is the best news. That the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
It's supper-time, my lord;
It's nine o'clock.
It is, my liege; and all things are in readiness.
My lord?
Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
The King enacts more wonders than a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger.
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost.
                 Alarums. Enter KING RICHARD
Withdraw, my lord! I'll help you to a horse.
