Have patience, madam; there's no doubt his Majesty
Will soon recover his accustom'd health.
She may, my lord; for-
What, marry, may she?
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We follow'd then our lord, our sovereign king.
So should we you, if you should be our king.
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
Were you well serv'd, you would be taught your
  duty.
And so doth mine. I muse why she's at liberty.
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us!
We wait upon your Grace.
                                   Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
By heaven, my soul is purg'd from grudging hate;
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son. Send straight for him;
Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives.
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.
           Enter GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, DERBY,
                  HASTINGS, and RATCLIFF
And so in me; and so, I think, in an.
Yet, since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urg'd;
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham
That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince.
Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
To-day shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
And for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.
Then curs'd she Richard, then curs'd she
Buckingham,
Then curs'd she Hastings. O, remember, God,
To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!
And for my sister, and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
Come, Grey; come, Vaughan; let us here embrace.
Farewell, until we meet again in heaven.              Exeunt
