Good time of day unto my gracious lord!
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must;
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.
More pity that the eagles should be mew'd
Whiles kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
No news so bad abroad as this at home:
The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,
And his physicians fear him mightily.
He is.
O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!
And so swear I.                       [They embrace]
And so say I.
On what occasion, God He knows, not I,
The Queen your mother and your brother York
Have taken sanctuary. The tender Prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.
I go, my lord.
 [Within]  Who knocks?
 [Within]  What is't o'clock?
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious
nights?
What then?
Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord;
Bid him not fear the separated council:
His honour and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my good friend Catesby;
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance;
And for his dreams, I wonder he's so simple
To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.
To fly the boar before the boar pursues
Were to incense the boar to follow us
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me;
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring.
What news, what news, in this our tott'ring state?
How, wear the garland! Dost thou mean the
crown?
I'll have this crown of mine cut from my
shoulders
Before I'll see the crown so foul misplac'd.
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still my adversaries;
But that I'll give my voice on Richard's side
To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it to the death.
But I shall laugh at this a twelve month hence,
That they which brought me in my master's hate,
I live to look upon their tragedy.
Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older,
I'll send some packing that yet think not on't.
O monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so 'twill do
With some men else that think themselves as safe
As thou and I, who, as thou knowest, are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
I know they do, and I have well deserv'd it.
                  Enter LORD STANLEY
Come on, come on; where is your boar-spear, man?
Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
My lord, I hold my life as dear as yours,
And never in my days, I do protest,
Was it so precious to me as 'tis now.
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?
Come, come, have with you. Wot you what, my
Lord?
To-day the lords you talk'd of are beheaded.
Go on before; I'll talk with this good fellow.
                                  Exeunt STANLEY and CATESBY
How now, Hastings! How goes the world with thee?
I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now
Than when thou met'st me last where now we meet:
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower
By the suggestion of the Queen's allies;
But now, I tell thee-keep it to thyself-
This day those enernies are put to death,
And I in better state than e'er I was.
Gramercy, Hastings; there, drink that for me.
                                      [Throws him his purse]
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt for your last exercise;
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.
                                    [He whispers in his ear]
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
The men you talk of came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?
Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
I'll wait upon your lordship.                 Exeunt
Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met
Is to determine of the coronation.
In God's name speak-when is the royal day?
I thank his Grace, I know he loves me well;
But for his purpose in the coronation
I have not sounded him, nor he deliver'd
His gracious pleasure any way therein.
But you, my honourable lords, may name the time;
And in the Duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.
                   Enter GLOUCESTER
His Grace looks cheerfully and smooth this
morning;
There's some conceit or other likes him well
When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.
I think there's never a man in Christendom
Can lesser hide his love or hate than he;
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
Marry, that with no man here he is offended;
For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.
           Re-enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM
The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this princely presence
To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be.
I say, my lord, they have deserved death.
If they have done this deed, my noble lord-
Woe, woe, for England! not a whit for me;
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
And I did scorn it and disdain to fly.
Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And started when he look'd upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
O, now I need the priest that spake to me!
I now repent I told the pursuivant,
As too triumphing, how mine enemies
To-day at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd,
And I myself secure in grace and favour.
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head!
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in air of your good looks
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready with every nod to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
O bloody Richard! Miserable England!
I prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee
That ever wretched age hath look'd upon.
Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head.
They smile at me who shortly shall be dead.           Exeunt
