I am much bounden to your Majesty.
So well that what you bid me undertake,
Though that my death were adjunct to my act,
By heaven, I would do it.
And I'll keep him so
That he shall not offend your Majesty.
My lord?
He shall not live.
Heat me these irons hot; and look thou stand
Within the arras. When I strike my foot
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
And bind the boy which you shall find with me
Fast to the chair. Be heedful; hence, and watch.
Uncleanly scruples! Fear not you. Look to't.
                                              Exeunt EXECUTIONERS
Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you.
                Enter ARTHUR
Good morrow, little Prince.
Indeed I have been merrier.
 [Aside]  If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
He will awake my mercy, which lies dead;
Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.
 [Aside]  His words do take possession of my bosom.-
Read here, young Arthur.                        [Showing a paper]
  [Aside]  How now, foolish rheum!
Turning dispiteous torture out of door!
I must be brief, lest resolution drop
Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.-
Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?
Young boy, I must.
And I will.
I have sworn to do it;
And with hot irons must I burn them out.
 [Stamps]  Come forth.
 Re-enter EXECUTIONERS, With cord, irons, etc.
Do as I bid you do.
Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here.
Go, stand within; let me alone with him.
Come, boy, prepare yourself.
None, but to lose your eyes.
Is this your promise? Go to, hold your tongue.
I can heat it, boy.
But with my breath I can revive it, boy.
Well, see to live; I will not touch thine eye
For all the treasure that thine uncle owes.
Yet I am sworn, and I did purpose, boy,
With this same very iron to burn them out.
Peace; no more. Adieu.
Your uncle must not know but you are dead:
I'll fill these dogged spies with false reports;
And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure
That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world,
Will not offend thee.
Silence; no more. Go closely in with me.
Much danger do I undergo for thee.                         Exeunt
My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night;
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
The other four in wondrous motion.
Old men and beldams in the streets
Do prophesy upon it dangerously;
Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths;
And when they talk of him, they shake their heads,
And whisper one another in the ear;
And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist,
Whilst he that hears makes fearful action
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
I saw a smith stand with his hammer, thus,
The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool,
With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news;
Who, with his shears and measure in his hand,
Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
Told of a many thousand warlike French
That were embattailed and rank'd in Kent.
Another lean unwash'd artificer
Cuts off his tale, and talks of Arthur's death.
No had, my lord! Why, did you not provoke me?
Here is your hand and seal for what I did.
My lord-
Arm you against your other enemies,
I'll make a peace between your soul and you.
Young Arthur is alive. This hand of mine
Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand,
Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.
Within this bosom never ent'red yet
The dreadful motion of a murderous thought
And you have slander'd nature in my form,
Which, howsoever rude exteriorly,
Is yet the cover of a fairer mind
Than to be butcher of an innocent child.
Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you.
Arthur doth live; the King hath sent for you.
I am no villain.
Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say;
By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours.
I would not have you, lord, forget yourself,
Nor tempt the danger of my true defence;
Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget
Your worth, your greatness and nobility.
Not for my life; but yet I dare defend
My innocent life against an emperor.
Do not prove me so.
Yet I am none. Whose tongue soe'er speaks false,
Not truly speaks; who speaks not truly, lies.
Lord Bigot, I am none.
'Tis not an hour since I left him well.
I honour'd him, I lov'd him, and will weep
My date of life out for his sweet life's loss.
Do but hear me, sir.
Upon my soul-
If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
Let hell want pains enough to torture me!
I left him well.
Badly, I fear. How fares your Majesty?
Who's there? Speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot.
Of the part of England.
What's that to thee? Why may I not demand
Of thine affairs as well as thou of mine?
Thou hast a perfect thought.
I will upon all hazards well believe
Thou art my friend that know'st my tongue so well.
Who art thou?
Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night
Have done me shame. Brave soldier, pardon me
That any accent breaking from thy tongue
Should scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.
Why, here walk I in the black brow of night
To find you out.
O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
Black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible.
The King, I fear, is poison'd by a monk;
I left him almost speechless and broke out
To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
The better arm you to the sudden time
Than if you had at leisure known of this.
A monk, I tell you; a resolved villain,
Whose bowels suddenly burst out. The King
Yet speaks, and peradventure may recover.
Why, know you not? The lords are all come back,
And brought Prince Henry in their company;
At whose request the King hath pardon'd them,
And they are all about his Majesty.
