Whither away so fast?
I'll save you
That labour, sir. All's now done but the ceremony
Of bringing back the prisoner.
Yes, indeed, was I.
You may guess quickly what.
Yes, truly is he, and condemn'd upon't.
So are a number more.
I'll tell you in a little. The great Duke.
Came to the bar; where to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged
Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
The King's attorney, on the contrary,
Urg'd on the examinations, proofs, confessions,
Of divers witnesses; which the Duke desir'd
To have brought, viva voce, to his face;
At which appear'd against him his surveyor,
Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,
Confessor to him, with that devil-monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.
The same.
All these accus'd him strongly, which he fain
Would have flung from him; but indeed he could not;
And so his peers, upon this evidence,
Have found him guilty of high treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all
Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
When he was brought again to th' bar to hear
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirr'd
With such an agony he sweat extremely,
And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty;
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
In all the rest show'd a most noble patience.
Sure, he does not;
He never was so womanish; the cause
He may a little grieve at.
'Tis likely,
By all conjectures: first, Kildare's attainder,
Then deputy of Ireland, who remov'd,
Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,
Lest he should help his father.
At his return
No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,
And generally: whoever the King favours
The Cardinal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from court too.
Stay there, sir,
And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of.
O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,
I fear, too many curses on their heads
That were the authors.
Good angels keep it from us!
What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?
Let me have it;
I do not talk much.
Yes, but it held not;
For when the King once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
To stop the rumour and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.
'Tis the Cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor
For not bestowing on him at his asking
The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purpos'd.
'Tis woeful.
We are too open here to argue this;
Let's think in private more.                               Exeunt
Y'are well met once again.
You come to take your stand here, and
  behold
The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?
'Tis very true. But that time offer'd
  sorrow;
This, general joy.
Never greater,
Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.
Yes; 'tis the list
Of those that claim their offices this day,
By custom of the coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles of
From Ampthill, where the Princess lay; to which
She was often cited by them, but appear'd not.
And, to be short, for not appearance and
The King's late scruple, by the main assent
Of all these learned men, she was divorc'd,
And the late marriage made of none effect;
Since which she was removed to Kimbolton,
Where she remains now sick.
Marquis Dorset;
And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.
'Tis the same-High Steward.
Yes.
They that bear
The cloth of honour over her are four barons
Of the Cinque-ports.
It is; and all the rest are countesses.
No more of that.
               Exit Procession, with a great flourish of trumpets
           Enter a third GENTLEMAN
God save you, sir! Where have you been broiling?
How was it?
Sir,
You must no more call it York Place: that's past:
For since the Cardinal fell that title's lost.
'Tis now the King's, and called Whitehall.
