If he were dead, what would betide on
me?
The loss of such a lord includes all
harms.
Ah, he is young; and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.
It is determin'd, not concluded yet;
But so it must be, if the King miscarry.
                 Enter BUCKINGHAM and DERBY
The Countess Richmond, good my Lord
of Derby,
To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assur'd
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
Saw you the King to-day, my Lord of
Derby?
What likelihood of his amendment,
Lords?
God grant him health! Did you confer
with him?
Would all were well! But that will
never be.
I fear our happiness is at the height.
          Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and DORSET
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the
matter.
The King, on his own royal disposition
And not provok'd by any suitor else-
Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred
That in your outward action shows itself
Against my children, brothers, and myself-
Makes him to send that he may learn the ground.
Come, come, we know your meaning,
brother Gloucester:
You envy my advancement and my friends';
God grant we never may have need of you!
By Him that rais'd me to this careful
height
From that contented hap which I enjoy'd,
I never did incense his Majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do me shameful injury
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long
borne
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.
By heaven, I will acquaint his Majesty
Of those gross taunts that oft I have endur'd.
I had rather be a country servant-maid
Than a great queen with this condition-
To be so baited, scorn'd, and stormed at.
            Enter old QUEEN MARGARET, behind
Small joy have I in being England's Queen.
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
You should enjoy were you this country's king,
As little joy you may suppose in me
That I enjoy, being the Queen thereof.
So just is God to right the innocent.
Thus have you breath'd your curse
against yourself.
I never did her any to my knowledge.
Catesby, I come. Lords, will you go
with me?
There, Hastings; I will never more
remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter.
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and
weep,
To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
I'll join with black despair against my soul
And to myself become an enemy.
To make an act of tragic violence.
Why grow the branches when the root is gone?
Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
That our swift-winged souls may catch the King's,
Or like obedient subjects follow him
To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
Give me no help in lamentation;
I am not barren to bring forth complaints.
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes
That I, being govern'd by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!
Ah for my husband, for my dear Lord Edward!
What stay had I but Edward? and he's
gone.
Was never widow had so dear a loss.
But I hear no; they say my son of York
Has almost overta'en him in his growth.
A parlous boy! Go to, you are too
shrewd.
Pitchers have ears.
                    Enter a MESSENGER
How doth the Prince?
Ay me, I see the ruin of my house!
The tiger now hath seiz'd the gentle hind;
Insulting tyranny begins to jet
Upon the innocent and aweless throne.
Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre!
I see, as in a map, the end of all.
Come, come, my boy; we will to
sanctuary.
Madam, farewell.
You have no cause.
As much to you, good sister! Whither
away?
Kind sister, thanks; we'll enter
all together.
                   Enter BRAKENBURY
And in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the Prince, and my young son of York?
The King! Who's that?
The Lord protect him from that kingly
title!
Hath he set bounds between their love and me?
I am their mother; who shall bar me from them?
Ah, cut my lace asunder
That my pent heart may have some scope to beat,
Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news!
O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee
gone!
Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels;
Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead,
And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.
Go, go, poor soul; I envy not thy glory.
To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.
Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.
Stay, yet look back with me unto the
Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immur'd within your walls,
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones.
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes, use my babies well.
So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.         Exeunt
Ah, my poor princes! ah, my tender
babes!
My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets!
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fix'd in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings
And hear your mother's lamentation.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle
lambs
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a
grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
Ah, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
                                       [Sitting down by her]
O, thou didst prophesy the time would
  come
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!
O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile
And teach me how to curse mine enemies!
My words are dull; O, quicken them
with thine!
Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miseries,
Let them have scope; though what they will impart
Help nothing else, yet do they case the heart.
Hidest thou that forehead with a golden
crown
Where't should be branded, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the Prince that ow'd that crown,
And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?
Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan,
Grey?
Though far more cause, yet much less
  spirit to curse
Abides in me; I say amen to her.
I have no moe sons of the royal blood
For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens;
And therefore level not to hit their lives.
And must she die for this? O, let her
  live,
And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,
Slander myself as false to Edward's bed,
Throw over her the veil of infamy;
So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edward's daughter.
To save her life I'll say she is not so.
And only in that safety died her
  brothers.
No, to their lives ill friends were
  contrary.
True, when avoided grace makes destiny.
My babes were destin'd to a fairer death,
If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.
Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle
  cozen'd
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever lanc'd their tender hearts,
Thy head, an indirectly, gave direction.
No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that stiff use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes;
And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death,
Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
What good is cover'd with the face of
  heaven,
To be discover'd, that can do me good?
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their
heads?
Flatter my sorrow with report of it;
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
Be brief, lest that the process of thy
  kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
My daughter's mother thinks it with her
soul.
That thou dost love my daughter from
  thy soul.
So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers,
And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.
Well, then, who dost thou mean shall be
her king?
What, thou?
How canst thou woo her?
And wilt thou learn of me?
Send to her, by the man that slew her
brothers,
A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave
'Edward' and 'York.' Then haply will she weep;
Therefore present to her-as sometimes Margaret
Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood-
A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body,
And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.
If this inducement move her not to love,
Send her a letter of thy noble deeds;
Tell her thou mad'st away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers; ay, and for her sake
Mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
There is no other way;
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape
And not be Richard that hath done all this.
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but
  hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
What were I best to say? Her father's
  brother
Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle?
Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee
That God, the law, my honour, and her love
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
Which she shall purchase with
still-lasting war.
That at her hands which the King's
King forbids.
To wail the title, as her mother doth.
But how long shall that title 'ever' last?
But how long fairly shall her sweet life
last?
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
But she, your subject, loathes such
sovereignty.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly
told.
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
O, no, my reasons are too deep and
  dead-
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
Harp on it still shall I till heartstrings
break.
Profan'd, dishonour'd, and the third
usurp'd.
By nothing; for this is no oath:
Thy George, profan'd, hath lost his lordly honour;
Thy garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue;
Thy crown, usurp'd, disgrac'd his kingly glory.
If something thou wouldst swear to be believ'd,
Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.
Thy self is self-misus'd.
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
Thy life hath it dishonour'd.
God's wrong is most of all.
If thou didst fear to break an oath with Him,
The unity the King my husband made
Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
Th' imperial metal, circling now thy head,
Had grac'd the tender temples of my child;
And both the Princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,
Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?
That thou hast wronged in the time
o'erpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughter'd,
Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age;
The parents live whose children thou hast butcheed,
Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come; for that thou hast
Misus'd ere us'd, by times ill-us'd o'erpast.
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
Yet thou didst kill my children.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
I go. Write to me very shortly,
And you shall understand from me her mind.
