My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby.
You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
I do not like these several councils, I.
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from
London,
Were jocund and suppos'd their states were sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.
This sudden stab of rancour I misdoubt;
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward.
What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
They, for their truth, might better wear their
heads
Than some that have accus'd them wear their hats.
But come, my lord, let's away.
             Enter HASTINGS, a pursuivant
Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,
And I'll salute your Grace of York as mother
And reverend looker-on of two fair queens.
[To ANNE]  Come, madam, you must straight to
Westminster,
There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
Take all the swift advantage of the hours;
You shall have letters from me to my son
In your behalf, to meet you on the way.
Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.
Know, my loving lord,
The Marquis Dorset, as I hear, is fled
To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.    [Stands apart]
None good, my liege, to please you with
the hearing;
Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
Richmond is on the seas.
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
He makes for England here to claim the crown.
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
No, my good lord; therefore mistrust me not.
No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
They have not been commanded, mighty King.
Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,
I'll muster up my friends and meet your Grace
Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
Most mighty sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.
I never was nor never will be false.
So deal with him as I prove true to you.         Exit
                      Enter a MESSENGER
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of the most deadly boar
My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold;
If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
The fear of that holds off my present aid.
So, get thee gone; commend me to thy lord.
Withal say that the Queen hath heartily consented
He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
What men of name resort to him?
Well, hie thee to thy lord; I kiss his hand;
My letter will resolve him of my mind.
Farewell.                                             Exeunt
