I am resolv'd; 'tis but a three years' fast.
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine.
Fat paunches have lean pates; and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.
He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
Four days ago.
Marry, that did I.
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
And so to study three years is but short.
  Enter DULL, a constable, with a letter, and COSTARD
A high hope for a low heaven. God grant us patience!
To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or, to
forbear both.
I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
Pray you, sir, whose daughter?
God's blessing on your beard!
Nay, my choler is ended.
She is a most sweet lady.
Ay me, I am forsworn!
Am I the first that have been perjur'd so?
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.
O sweet Maria, empress of my love!
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
This same shall go.          [He reads the sonnet]
  'Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
  'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
  Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
  Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
  A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
  Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
  My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
  Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.
  Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is;
  Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
  Exhal'st this vapour-vow; in thee it is.
  If broken, then it is no fault of mine;
  If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
  To lose an oath to win a paradise?'
By whom shall I send this?- Company! Stay.
                                               [Steps aside]
And I had mine!
[Advancing] Dumain, thy love is far from charity,
That in love's grief desir'st society;
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear
 it.
And since her time are colliers counted bright.
Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.
                                          [Showing his shoe]
O, some authority how to proceed;
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil!
Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by.
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
You have a double tongue within your mask,
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
A calf, fair lady!
Let's part the word.
Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
Will you give horns, chaste lady? Do not so.
One word in private with you ere I die.
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
His leg is too big for Hector's.
Stuck with cloves.
That columbine.
I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against
Hector.
So did our looks.
What says Maria?
I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.
