The young Dumain, a well-accomplish'd youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved;
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill,
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
How needless was it then to ask the question!
'Tis long of you, that spur me with such questions.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
The hour that fools should ask.
Fair fall the face it covers!
Amen, so you be none.
Two hot sheeps, marry!
You sheep and I pasture- shall that finish the jest?
Not so, gentle beast;
My lips are no common, though several they be.
To my fortunes and me.
He is Cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
And so she died. Had she been light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
She might 'a been a grandam ere she died.
And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
A light condition in a beauty dark.
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
So do not you; for you are a light wench.
You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.
Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows!
Madam, this glove.
Yes, madam; and, moreover,
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover;
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Vilely compil'd, profound simplicity.
But, in this changing, what is your intent?
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
O for your reason! Quickly, sir; I long.
'Veal' quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?
No, a fair lord calf.
No, I'll not be your half.
Take all and wean it; it may prove an ox.
Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
Bleat softly, then; the butcher hears you cry.
                                       [They converse apart]
Lord Longaville said I came o'er his heart;
And trow you what he call'd me?
Yes, in good faith.
And Longaville was for my service born.
A beard, fair health, and honesty;
With threefold love I wish you all these three.
No so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day
I'll mark no words that smooth-fac'd wooers say.
Come when the King doth to my lady come;
Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
