Very reverent sport, truly; and done in the testimony of
a good conscience.
Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
varied, like a scholar at the least; but, sir, I assure ye it was
a buck of the first head.
Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in
  a book;
He hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk ink; his
intellect is not replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible
in the duller parts;
And such barren plants are set before us that we thankful should
  be-
Which we of taste and feeling are- for those parts that do
  fructify in us more than he.
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
So, were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school.
But, omne bene, say I, being of an old father's mind:
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge, so it shall please
you to abrogate scurrility.
A rare talent!
Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my
parishioners; for their sons are well tutor'd by you, and their
daughters profit very greatly under you. You are a good member of
the commonwealth.
Ay, sir, and very learned.
[Reads] 'If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to
  love?
Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed!
Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove;
Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bowed.
Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend.
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend;
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire.
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, O, pardon love this wrong,
That singes heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.'
Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
religiously; and, as a certain father saith-
Marvellous well for the pen.
And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is the
happiness of life.
I praise God for you, sir. Your reasons at dinner have
been sharp and sententious; pleasant without scurrility, witty
without affection, audacious without impudency, learned without
opinion, and strange without heresy. I did converse this quondam
day with a companion of the King's who is intituled, nominated,
or called, Don Adriano de Armado.
A most singular and choice epithet.
                                  [Draws out his table-book]
Laus Deo, bone intelligo.
Videsne quis venit?
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander;
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my conquering might.
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander-
When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander-
