Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live regist'red upon our brazen tombs,
And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,
Th' endeavour of this present breath may buy
That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge,
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors- for so you are
That war against your own affections
And the huge army of the world's desires-
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little Academe,
Still and contemplative in living art.
You three, Berowne, Dumain, and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years' term to live with me
My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here.
Your oaths are pass'd; and now subscribe your names,
That his own hand may strike his honour down
That violates the smallest branch herein.
If you are arm'd to do as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
Why, that to know which else we should not know.
Ay, that is study's god-like recompense.
These be the stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.
How well he's read, to reason against reading!
Well, sit out; go home, Berowne; adieu.
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
We must of force dispense with this decree;
She must lie here on mere necessity.
Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain,
A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
One who the music of his own vain tongue
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
A man of complements, whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate,
In high-born words, the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate.
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I;
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
Will you hear this letter with attention?
[Reads] 'Great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent and sole
dominator of Navarre, my soul's earth's god and body's fost'ring
patron'-
[Reads] 'So it is'-
Peace!
No words!
[Reads] 'So it is, besieged with sable-coloured melancholy, I
did commend the black oppressing humour to the most wholesome
physic of thy health-giving air; and, as I am a gentleman, betook
myself to walk. The time When? About the sixth hour; when beasts
most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment
which is called supper. So much for the time When. Now for the
ground Which? which, I mean, I upon; it is ycleped thy park. Then
for the place Where? where, I mean, I did encounter that obscene
and most prepost'rous event that draweth from my snow-white pen
the ebon-coloured ink which here thou viewest, beholdest,
surveyest, or seest. But to the place Where? It standeth
north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy
curious-knotted garden. There did I see that low-spirited swain,
that base minnow of thy mirth,'
'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'
'that shallow vassal,'
'which, as I remember, hight Costard,'
'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established proclaimed
edict and continent canon; which, with, O, with- but with this I
passion to say wherewith-'
'For Jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called, which I
apprehended with the aforesaid swain- I keep her as a vessel of
thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
bring her to trial. Thine, in all compliments of devoted and
heart-burning heat of duty,
                                     DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say you to
this?
Did you hear the proclamation?
It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment to be taken with a
wench.
Well, it was proclaimed damsel.
It is so varied too, for it was proclaimed virgin.
This 'maid' not serve your turn, sir.
Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast a week
with bran and water.
And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o'er;
And go we, lords, to put in practice that
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
                         Exeunt KING, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN
Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
Hear me, dear lady: I have sworn an oath-
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns;
Being but the one half of an entire sum
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he or we, as neither have,
Receiv'd that sum, yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the money's worth.
If then the King your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his Majesty.
But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
For here he doth demand to have repaid
A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine;
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
And go well satisfied to France again.
I do protest I never heard of it;
And, if you prove it, I'll repay it back
Or yield up Aquitaine.
Satisfy me so.
It shall suffice me; at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
As honour, without breach of honour, may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness.
You may not come, fair Princess, within my gates;
But here without you shall be so receiv'd
As you shall deem yourself lodg'd in my heart,
Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
To-morrow shall we visit you again.
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.
                                        Exit with attendants
Ay me!
[Reads]
  'So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
  To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
  As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
  The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
  Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
  Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
  As doth thy face through tears of mine give light.
  Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep;
  No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
  So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
  Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
  And they thy glory through my grief will show.
  But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
  My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
  O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel
  No thought can think nor tongue of mortal tell.'
How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper-
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
                                               [Steps aside]
              Enter LONGAVILLE, with a paper
What, Longaville, and reading! Listen, car.
In love, I hope; sweet fellowship in shame!
And I mine too,.good Lord!
[Advancing] Come, sir, you blush; as his, your case is such.
You chide at him, offending twice as much:
You do not love Maria! Longaville
Did never sonnet for her sake compile;
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom, to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush,
And mark'd you both, and for you both did blush.
I heard your guilty rhymes, observ'd your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.
'Ay me!' says one. 'O Jove!' the other cries.
One, her hairs were gold; crystal the other's eyes.
[To LONGAVILLE] You would for paradise break faith and troth;
[To Dumain] And Jove for your love would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn, how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.
Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betrayed thus to thy over-view?
Soft! whither away so fast?
A true man or a thief that gallops so?
What present hast thou there?
What makes treason here?
If it mar nothing neither,
The treason and you go in peace away together.
Berowne, read it over.        [BEROWNE reads the letter]
Where hadst thou it?
Where hadst thou it?
How now! What is in you? Why dost thou tear it?
What?
Hence, sirs, away.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
What zeal, what fury hath inspir'd thee now?
My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
She, an attending star, scarce seen a light.
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;
And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
'Twere good yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
But what of this? Are we not all in love?
Then leave this chat; and, good Berowne, now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
And win them too; therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
Away, away! No time shall be omitted
That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
Say to her we have measur'd many miles
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do.
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bid'st me beg; this begging is not strange.
Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
Yet still she is the Moon, and I the Man.
The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
But your legs should do it.
Why take we hands then?
More measure of this measure; be not nice.
Price you yourselves. What buys your company?
That can never be.
If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
I am best pleas'd with that.       [They converse apart]
Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
                         Exeunt KING, LORDS, and BLACKAMOORS
Fair sir, God save you! Where's the Princess?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
That put Armado's page out of his part!
    Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET; ROSALINE,
                  MARIA, and KATHARINE
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke.
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
O, you have liv'd in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
How, madam! Russians!
We were descried; they'll mock us now downright.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse.
Madam, I was.
I was, fair madam.
That more than all the world I did respect her.
Upon mine honour, no.
Despise me when I break this oath of mine.
What mean you, madam? By my life, my troth,
I never swore this lady such an oath.
My faith and this the Princess I did give;
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
Berowne, they will shame us; let them not approach.
I say they shall not come.
Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He presents
Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the Great; the parish curate,
Alexander; Arinado's page, Hercules; the pedant, Judas
Maccabaeus.
And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
These four will change habits and present the other five.
You are deceived, 'tis not so.
The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.
               Enter COSTARD, armed for POMPEY
Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
How fares your Majesty?
Madam, not so; I do beseech you stay.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed;
And often at his very loose decides
That which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince,
Yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
From what it purpos'd; since to wail friends lost
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant us your loves.
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
Hence hermit then, my heart is in thy breast.
No, madam; we will bring you on your way.
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth an' a day,
And then 'twill end.
Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
