A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
No, no; O Lord, sir, no!
By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signior.
Why tender juvenal? Why tender juvenal?
And I, tough signior, as an appertinent title to your old
time, which we may name tough.
How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? or I apt, and
my saying pretty?
Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
Speak you this in my praise, master?
I will praise an eel with the same praise.
That an eel is quick.
I am answer'd, sir.
[Aside] He speaks the mere contrary: crosses love not him.
You may do it in an hour, sir.
How many is one thrice told?
You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.
Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace
amounts to.
Which the base vulgar do call three.
Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here is three
studied ere ye'll thrice wink; and how easy it is to put 'years'
to the word 'three,' and study three years in two words, the
dancing horse will tell you.
[Aside] To prove you a cipher.
Hercules, master.
Samson, master; he was a man of good carriage, great
carriage, for he carried the town gates on his back like a
porter; and he was in love.
A woman, master.
Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the
four.
Of the sea-water green, sir.
As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
Most maculate thoughts, master, are mask'd under such
colours.
My father's wit my mother's tongue assist me!
     If she be made of white and red,
           Her faults will ne'er be known;
         For blushing cheeks by faults are bred,
           And fears by pale white shown.
         Then if she fear, or be to blame,
           By this you shall not know;
         For still her cheeks possess the same
           Which native she doth owe.
A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.
The world was very guilty of such a ballad some three ages
since; but I think now 'tis not to be found; or if it were, it
would neither serve for the writing nor the tune.
[Aside] To be whipt; and yet a better love than my master.
And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
Forbear till this company be past.
            Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA
Come, you transgressing slave, away.
No, sir; that were fast, and loose. Thou shalt to prison.
What shall some see?
Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?
No, my complete master; but to jig off a tune at the tongue's
end, canary to it with your feet, humour it with turning up your
eyelids, sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the
throat, as if you swallowed love with singing love, sometime
through the nose, as if you snuff'd up love by smelling love,
with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes, with
your arms cross'd on your thin-belly doublet, like a rabbit on a
spit, or your hands in your pocket, like a man after the old
painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away.
These are complements, these are humours; these betray nice
wenches, that would be betrayed without these; and make them men
of note- do you note me?- that most are affected to these.
By my penny of observation.
The hobby-horse is forgot.
No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love
perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?
Negligent student! learn her by heart.
And out of heart, master; all those three I will prove.
A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon the
instant. By heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by
her; in heart you love her, because your heart is in love with
her; and out of heart you love her, being out of heart that you
cannot enjoy her.
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.
A message well sympathiz'd- a horse to be ambassador for an
ass.
Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is
very slow-gaited. But I go.
As swift as lead, sir.
Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
You are too swift, sir, to say so:
Is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun?
Thump, then, and I flee.                            Exit
A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
Do the wise think them other? Is not l'envoy a salve?
I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
   Until the goose came out of door,
       And stay'd the odds by adding four.
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my l'envoy.
       The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
       Were still at odds, being but three.
A good l'envoy, ending in the goose; would you desire more?
By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
I will tell you sensibly.
Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
[Aside to COSTARD] They have been at a great feast of
languages and stol'n the scraps.
Peace! the peal begins.
Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a, b, spelt
backward with the horn on his head?
Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
The third of the five vowels, if You repeat them; or the
fifth, if I.
The sheep; the other two concludes it: o, U.
Offer'd by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
Horns.
Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about your
infamy circum circa- a gig of a cuckold's horn.
An excellent device! So, if any of the audience hiss, you may
cry 'Well done, Hercules; now thou crushest the snake!' That is
the way to make an offence gracious, though few have the grace to
do it.
Thrice-worthy gentleman!
All hail, the richest heauties on the earth!
A holy parcel of the fairest dames
                        [The LADIES turn their backs to him]
That ever turn'd their- backs- to mortal views!
That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!
Out-
Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
Not to behold-
Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes- with your
sun-beamed eyes-
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you not see
Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean you? You will lose
your reputation.
