Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.
Consider who the King your father sends,
To whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As Nature was in making graces dear,
When she did starve the general world beside
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his competitors in oath
Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
                                [The LADIES-IN-WAITING mask]
         Enter KING, LONGAVILLE, DUMAIN, BEROWNE,
                     and ATTENDANTS
Here comes Navarre.
So please your Grace, the packet is not come,
Where that and other specialties are bound;
To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
Her mother's, I have heard.
Good sir, be not offended;
She is an heir of Falconbridge.
Not unlike, sir; that may be.           Exit LONGAVILLE
Rosaline, by good hap.
To her will, sir, or so.
Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
                                 Exit BEROWNE. LADIES Unmask
And every jest but a word.
I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
So you grant pasture for me.     [Offering to kiss her]
Belonging to whom?
If my observation, which very seldom lies,
By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
With that which we lovers entitle 'affected.'
Why, all his behaviours did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
His heart, like an agate, with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed;
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair.
Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
Who, tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd,
Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd.
His face's own margent did quote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd;
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
Do you hear, my mad wenches?
What, then; do you see?
You are too hard for me.                         Exeunt
I know not; but I think it was not he.
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
Lords o'er their lords?
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
I am bound to serve.
This letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
It is writ to Jaquenetta.
[Reads] 'By heaven, that thou art fair is most infallible;
true that thou art beauteous; truth itself that thou art lovely.
More fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than truth
itself, have commiseration on thy heroical vassal. The
magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set eye upon the
pernicious and indubitate beggar Zenelophon; and he it was that
might rightly say, 'Veni, vidi, vici'; which to annothanize in
the vulgar,- O base and obscure vulgar!- videlicet, He came, saw,
and overcame. He came, one; saw, two; overcame, three. Who came?-
the king. Why did he come?- to see. Why did he see?-to overcome.
To whom came he?- to the beggar. What saw he?- the beggar. Who
overcame he?- the beggar. The conclusion is victory; on whose
side?- the king's. The captive is enrich'd; on whose side?- the
beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial; on whose side?- the
king's. No, on both in one, or one in both. I am the king, for so
stands the comparison; thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy
lowliness. Shall I command thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy
love? I could. Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou
exchange for rags?- robes, for tittles?- titles, for thyself?
-me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot, my
eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part.
              Thine in the dearest design of industry,
                                       DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.
'Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey;
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play.
But if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.'
I am much deceived but I remember the style.
This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the Prince and his book-mates.
Who is the shooter? who is the shooter?
Ay, my continent of beauty.
My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on!
And who is your deer?
But she herself is hit lower. Have I hit her now?
So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a woman when
Queen Guinever of Britain was a little wench, as touching the hit
it.
   An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
        An I cannot, another can.
                               Exeunt ROSALINE and KATHARINE
A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
I fear too much rubbing; good-night, my good owl.
                                      Exeunt BOYET and MARIA
O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her Grace?
Prepare, madam, prepare!
Arm, wenches, arm! Encounters mounted are
Against your peace. Love doth approach disguis'd,
Armed in arguments; you'll be surpris'd.
Muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
Under the cool shade of a sycamore
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
When, lo, to interrupt my purpos'd rest,
Toward that shade I might behold addrest
The King and his companions; warily
I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
And overheard what you shall overhear-
That, by and by, disguis'd they will be here.
Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage.
Action and accent did they teach him there:
'Thus must thou speak' and 'thus thy body bear,'
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Presence majestical would put him out;
'For' quoth the King 'an angel shalt thou see;
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.'
The boy replied 'An angel is not evil;
I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.'
With that all laugh'd, and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
One rubb'd his elbow, thus, and fleer'd, and swore
A better speech was never spoke before.
Another with his finger and his thumb
Cried 'Via! we will do't, come what will come.'
The third he caper'd, and cried 'All goes well.'
The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
With that they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
They do, they do, and are apparell'd thus,
Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parley, court, and dance;
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress; which they'll know
By favours several which they did bestow.
Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
The trumpet sounds; be mask'd; the maskers come.
                                           [The LADIES mask]
      Enter BLACKAMOORS music, MOTH as Prologue, the
 KING and his LORDS as maskers, in the guise of Russians
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
True; out indeed.
They will not answer to that epithet;
You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
What would you with the Princess?
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
She says you have it, and you may be gone.
They say that they have measur'd many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
If to come hither you have measur'd miles,
And many miles, the Princess bids you tell
How many inches doth fill up one mile.
She hears herself.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the razor's edge invisible,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
Above the sense of sense; so sensible
Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings,
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes; for it can never be
They will digest this harsh indignity.
They will, they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows;
Therefore, change favours; and, when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud:
Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
Ladies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
Gone to her tent. Please it your Majesty
Command me any service to her thither?
I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.          Exit
Full merrily
Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.
With libbard's head on knee.
Your nose says, no, you are not; for it stands to right.
Most true, 'tis right, you were so, Alisander.
To make Judas hang himself.
A cittern-head.
The pommel of Coesar's falchion.
Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude! Nay, why dost thou stay?
A light for Monsieur Judas! It grows dark, he may stumble.
                                        [HOLOFERNES retires]
But is this Hector?
No; he is best indued in the small.
[Aside to DUMAIN] Loves her by the foot.
Renowned Pompey!
True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of linen;
since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of
Jaquenetta's, and that 'a wears next his heart for a favour.
             Enter as messenger, MONSIEUR MARCADE
