Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
Not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues;
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
Than you much willing to be counted wise
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court.
Therefore to's seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
Tell him the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business, craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personal conference with his Grace.
Haste, signify so much; while we attend,
Like humble-visag'd suitors, his high will.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
                                                  Exit BOYET
Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
Know you the man?
Some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
Such short-liv'd wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the rest?
God bless my ladies! Are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Now, what admittance, lord?
'Fair' I give you back again; and 'welcome' I
have not yet. The roof of this court is too high to be yours, and
welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
I will be welcome then; conduct me thither.
Our Lady help my lord! He'll be forsworn.
Why, will shall break it; will, and nothing
else.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your Grace hath sworn out house-keeping.
'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
And sin to break it.
But pardon me, I am too sudden bold;
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.         [Giving a paper]
YOU Will the sooner that I were away,
For you'll prove perjur'd if you make me stay.
You do the King my father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
We arrest your word.
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For such a sum from special officers
Of Charles his father.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your
Grace!
It was well done of you to take him at his
word.
Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles,
  agree;
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
With what?
Your reason?
Come, to our pavilion. Boyet is dispos'd.
Was that the King that spurr'd his horse so
  hard
Against the steep uprising of the hill?
Whoe'er 'a was, 'a show'd a mounting mind.
Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch;
On Saturday we will return to France.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?
I thank my beauty I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
What, what? First praise me, and again say no?
O short-liv'd pride! Not fair? Alack for woe!
Nay, never paint me now;
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:
                                         [ Giving him money]
Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
See, see, my beauty will be sav'd by merit.
O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the bow. Now mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well is then accounted ill;
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And, out of question, so it is sometimes:
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deer's blood that my heart means no ill.
Only for praise; and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.
                   Enter COSTARD
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that
have no heads.
The thickest and the tallest.
What's your will, sir? What's your will?
O, thy letter, thy letter! He's a good friend
  of mine.
Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve.
Break up this capon.
We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
What plume of feathers is he that indited this
  letter?
What vane? What weathercock? Did you ever hear better?
Else your memory is bad, going o'er it
erewhile.
Thou fellow, a word.
Who gave thee this letter?
To whom shouldst thou give it?
From which lord to which lady?
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords,
  away.
[To ROSALINE] Here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine another
  day.                             Exeunt PRINCESS and TRAIN
Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
Look you what I have from the loving King.
Nothing but this! Yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper
Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
Well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd.
But, Rosaline, you have a favour too?
Who sent it? and what is it?
Anything like?
Beauteous as ink- a good conclusion.
But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair
Dumain?
Did he not send you twain?
I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
The chain were longer and the letter short?
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
None are so surely caught, when they are
  catch'd,
As wit turn'd fool; folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
Thy news, Boyet?
Saint Dennis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us? Say, scout, say.
But what, but what, come they to visit us?
And will they so? The gallants shall be task'd,
For, ladies, we will every one be mask'd;
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
And then the King will court thee for his dear;
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
And change you favours too; so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceiv'd by these removes.
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs.
They do it but in mocking merriment,
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet
With visages display'd to talk and greet.
No, to the death, we will not move a foot,
Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace;
But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt
The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out.
There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own;
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they well mock'd depart away with shame.
                                     [Trumpet sounds within]
Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
Seventh sweet, adieu!
Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
Let it not be sweet.
Gall! bitter.
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
Will they not, think you, hang themselves to-night?
Or ever but in vizards show their faces?
This pert Berowne was out of count'nance quite.
Berowne did swear himself out of all suit.
Qualm, perhaps.
Go, sickness as thou art!
And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me.
Will they return?
How blow? how blow? Speak to be understood.
Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
             Exeunt PRINCESS, ROSALINE, KATHARINE, and MARIA
     Re-enter the KING, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN,
                    in their proper habits
'Fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as I conceive.
Then wish me better; I will give you leave.
This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjur'd men.
You nickname virtue: vice you should have
  spoke;
For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.
Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
As the unsullied lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your house's guest;
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.
Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
We have had pastimes here, and pleasant game;
A mess of Russians left us but of late.
Ay, in truth, my lord;
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Amaz'd, my lord? Why looks your Highness sad?
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but even now, disguis'd?
And were you well advis'd?
When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
When she shall challenge this, you will reject
her.
Peace, peace, forbear;
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
I will; and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
God give thee joy of him! The noble lord
 Most honourably doth uphold his word.
Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
And Lord Berowne, I thank him, is my dear.
What, will you have me, or your pearl again?
I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when she's dispos'd,
Told our intents before; which once disclos'd,
The ladies did change favours; and then we,
Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn in will and error.
Much upon this it is; [To BOYET] and might not you
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our page out. Go, you are allow'd;
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? There's an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword.
Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
That sport best pleases that doth least know how;
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents.
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things labouring perish in their birth.
Doth this man serve God?
'A speaks not like a man of God his making.
Great thanks, great Pompey.
The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good
Alexander.
Stand aside, good Pompey.
     Enter HOLOFERNES, for JUDAS; and MOTH, for HERCULES
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!
               Enter ARMADO, for HECTOR
Speak, brave Hector; we are much delighted.
Welcome, Marcade;
But that thou interruptest our merriment.
Dead, for my life!
Boyet, prepare; I will away to-night.
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
For all your fair endeavours, and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
In the converse of breath- your gentleness
Was guilty of it. Farewell, worthy lord.
A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue.
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtain'd.
I understand you not; my griefs are double.
We have receiv'd your letters, full of love;
Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
And, in our maiden council, rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time;
But more devout than this in our respects
Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
A time, methinks, too short
To make a world-without-end bargain in.
No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjur'd much,
Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this,
If for my love, as there is no such cause,
You will do aught- this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life
Change not your offer made in heat of blood,
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds,
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
But that it bear this trial, and last love,
Then, at the expiration of the year,
Come, challenge me, challenge me by these deserts;
And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
I will be thine; and, till that instant, shut
My woeful self up in a mournful house,
Raining the tears of lamentation
For the remembrance of my father's death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither intitled in the other's heart.
[ To the King] Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take
my leave.
Was not that not Hector?
