I thank you. I am not of many words, but I thank you.
There is no measure in the occasion that breeds; therefore
the sadness is without limit.
And when I have heard it, what blessings brings it?
I wonder that thou (being, as thou say'st thou art, born
under Saturn) goest about to apply a moral medicine to a
mortifying mischief. I cannot hide what I am: I must be sad when
I have cause, and smile at no man's jests; eat when I have
stomach, and wait for no man's leisure; sleep when I am drowsy,
and tend on no man's business; laugh when I am merry, and claw no
man in his humour.
I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace,
and it better fits my blood to be disdain'd of all than to
fashion a carriage to rob love from any. In this, though I cannot
be said to be a flattering honest man, it must not be denied but
I am a plain-dealing villain. I am trusted with a muzzle and
enfranchis'd with a clog; therefore I have decreed not to sing in
my cage. If I had my mouth, I would bite; if I had my liberty, I
would do my liking. In the meantime let me be that I am, and seek
not to alter me.
I make all use of it, for I use it only.
                   Enter Borachio.
Who comes here? What news, Borachio?
Will it serve for any model to build mischief on?
What is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?
Who? the most exquisite Claudio?
A proper squire! And who? and who? which way looks he?
A very forward March-chick! How came you to this?
Come, come, let us thither. This may prove food to my
displeasure. That young start-up hath all the glory of my
overthrow. If I can cross him any way, I bless myself every way.
You are both sure, and will assist me?
Let us to the great supper. Their cheer is the greater that
I am subdued. Would the cook were o' my mind! Shall we go prove
what's to be done?
Sure my brother is amorous on Hero and hath withdrawn her
father to break with him about it. The ladies follow her and but
one visor remains.
Are you not Signior Benedick?
Signior, you are very near my brother in his love. He is
enamour'd on Hero. I pray you dissuade him from her; she is no
equal for his birth. You may do the part of an honest man in it.
I heard him swear his affection.
Come, let us to the banquet.
                                      Exeunt. Manet Claudio.
It is so. The Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of
Leonato.
Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to me.
I am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his
affection ranges evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this
marriage?
Show me briefly how.
I remember.
What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?
What proof shall I make of that?
Only to despite them I will endeavour anything.
Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in
practice. Be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a
thousand ducats.
I will presently go learn their day of marriage.
                                                     Exeunt.
My lord and brother, God save you.
If your leisure serv'd, I would speak with you.
If it please you. Yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I
would speak of concerns him.
[to Claudio] Means your lordship to be married tomorrow?
I know not that, when he knows what I know.
You may think I love you not. Let that appear hereafter, and
aim better at me by that I now will manifest. For my brother, I
think he holds you well and in dearness of heart hath holp to
effect your ensuing marriage--surely suit ill spent and labour
ill bestowed!
I came hither to tell you, and, circumstances short'ned (for
she has been too long a-talking of), the lady is disloyal.
Even she--Leonato's Hero, your Hero, every man's Hero.
The word is too good to paint out her wickedness. I could say
she were worse; think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to
it. Wonder not till further warrant. Go but with me to-night, you
shall see her chamber window ent'red, even the night before her
wedding day. If you love her then, to-morrow wed her. But it
would better fit your honour to change your mind.
If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you
know. If you will follow me, I will show you enough; and when you
have seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly.
I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses.
Bear it coldly but till midnight, and let the issue show itself.
O plague right well prevented!
So will you say when you have seen the Sequel.
                                                     Exeunt.
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
Fie, fie! they are not to be nam'd, my lord--
Not to be spoke of;
There is not chastity, enough in language
Without offence to utter them. Thus, pretty lady,
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
Come let us go. These things, come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.
                  [Exeunt Don Pedro, Don Juan, and Claudio.]
