Were you in doubt, sir, that you ask'd her?
If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head
on her shoulders for all Messina, as like him as she is.
What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I am loved of
all ladies, only you excepted; and I would I could find in my
heart that I had not a hard heart, for truly I love none.
God keep your ladyship still in that mind! So some gentleman
or other shall scape a predestinate scratch'd face.
Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a
continuer. But keep your way, a God's name! I have done.
I noted her not, but I look'd on her.
Do you question me, as an honest man should do, for my simple
true judgment? or would you have me speak after my custom, as
being a professed tyrant to their sex?
Why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a high praise,
too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise.
Only this commendation I can afford her, that were she other
than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she
is, I do not like her.
Would you buy her, that you enquire after her?
Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this with a sad
brow? or do you play the flouting Jack, to tell us Cupid is a
good hare-finder and Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in what key
shall a man take you to go in the song?
I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter.
There's her cousin, an she were not possess'd with a fury,exceeds
her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of
December. But I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have
you?
Is't come to this? In faith, hath not the world one man but
he will wear his cap with suspicion? Shall I never see a
bachelor of threescore again? Go to, i' faith! An thou wilt needs
thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it and sigh away
Sundays.
                   Enter Don Pedro.
Look! Don Pedro is returned to seek you.
I would your Grace would constrain me to tell.
You hear, Count Claudio. I can be secret as a dumb man, I
would have you think so; but, on my allegiance--mark you this-on
my allegiance! he is in love. With who? Now that is your Grace's
part. Mark how short his answer is: With Hero, Leonato's short
daughter.
Like the old tale, my lord: 'It is not so, nor 'twas not so;
but indeed, God forbid it should be so!'
And, by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.
That I neither feel how she should be loved, nor know how she
should be worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me.
I will die in it at the stake.
That a woman conceived me, I thank her; that she brought me
up, I likewise give her most humble thanks; but that I will have
a rechate winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible
baldrick, all women shall pardon me. Because I will not do them
the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the right to trust
none; and the fine is (for the which I may go the finer), I will
live a bachelor.
With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord; not with
love. Prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get
again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen
and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of
blind Cupid.
If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me; and
he that hits me, let him be clapp'd on the shoulder and call'd
Adam.
The savage bull may; but if ever the sensible Benedick bear
it, pluck off the bull's horns and set them in my forehead, and
let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they write
'Here is good horse to hire,' let them signify under my sign
'Here you may see Benedick the married man.'
I look for an earthquake too then.
I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage; and
so I commit you--
Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your discourse is
sometime guarded with fragments, and the guards are but slightly
basted on neither. Ere you flout old ends any further, examine
your conscience. And so I leave you.                   Exit.
No, you shall pardon me.
Not now.
What's he?
Not I, believe me.
I pray you, what is he?
When I know the gentleman, I'll tell him what you say.
In every good thing.
Count Claudio?
Come, will you go with me?
Even to the next willow, about your own business, County. What
fashion will you wear the garland of? about your neck, like an
usurer's chain? or under your arm, like a lieutenant's scarf? You
must wear it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero.
Why, that's spoken like an honest drovier. So they sell
bullocks. But did you think the Prince would have served you
thus?
Ho! now you strike like the blind man! 'Twas the boy that
stole your meat, and you'll beat the post.
Alas, poor hurt fowl! now will he creep into sedges. But,
that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me! The
Prince's fool! Ha! it may be I go under that title because I am
merry. Yea, but so I am apt to do myself wrong. I am not so
reputed. It is the base (though bitter) disposition of Beatrice
that puts the world into her person and so gives me out. Well,
I'll be revenged as I may.
                     Enter Don Pedro.
Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame, I found
him here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren. I told him, and I
think I told him true, that your Grace had got the good will of
this young lady, and I off'red him my company to a willow tree,
either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him
up a rod, as being worthy to be whipt.
The flat transgression of a schoolboy who, being overjoyed
with finding a bird's nest, shows it his companion, and he steals
it.
Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the
garland too; for the garland he might have worn himself, and the
rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as I take it, have stol'n
his bird's nest.
If their singing answer your saying, by my faith you say
honestly.
O, she misus'd me past the endurance of a block! An oak but
with one green leaf on it would have answered her; my very visor
began to assume life and scold with her. She told me, not
thinking I had been myself, that I was the Prince's jester, that
I was duller than a great thaw; huddling jest upon jest with such
impossible conveyance upon me that I stood like a man at a mark,
with a whole army shooting at me. She speaks poniards, and every
word stabs. If her breath were as terrible as her terminations,
there were no living near her; she would infect to the North
Star. I would not marry her though she were endowed with all that
Adam had left him before he transgress'd. She would have made
Hercules have turn'd spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make
the fire too. Come, talk not of her. You shall find her the
infernal Ate in good apparel. I would to God some scholar would
conjure her, for certainly, while she is here, a man may live as
quiet in hell as in a sanctuary; and people sin upon purpose,
because they would go thither; so indeed all disquiet, horror,
and perturbation follows her.
       Enter Claudio and Beatrice, Leonato, Hero.
Will your Grace command me any service to the world's end? I
will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can
devise to send me on; I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the
furthest inch of Asia; bring you the length of Prester John's
foot; fetch you a hair off the great Cham's beard; do you any
embassage to the Pygmies--rather than hold three words'
conference with this harpy. You have no employment for me?
O God, sir, here's a dish I love not! I cannot endure my Lady
Tongue.                                              [Exit.]
Boy!
                [Enter Boy.]
In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it hither to me in
the orchard.
I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again.
(Exit Boy.) I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much
another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviours to love,
will, after he hath laugh'd at such shallow follies in others,
become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love; and such
a man is Claudio. I have known when there was no music with him
but the drum and the fife; and now had he rather hear the tabor
and the pipe. I have known when he would have walk'd ten mile
afoot to see a good armour; and now will he lie ten nights awake
carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont to speak plain
and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier; and now is
he turn'd orthography; his words are a very fantastical banquet--
just so many strange dishes. May I be so converted and see with
these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not. I will not be sworn but
love may transform me to an oyster; but I'll take my oath on it,
till he have made an oyster of me he shall never make me such a
fool. One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet I am
well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all graces be in
one woman, one woman shall not come in my grace. Rich she shall
be, that's certain; wise, or I'll none; virtuous, or I'll never
cheapen her; fair, or I'll never look on her; mild, or come not
near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good discourse, an
excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what colour it
please God. Ha, the Prince and Monsieur Love! I will hide me in
the arbour.                                         [Hides.]
          Enter Don Pedro, Leonato, Claudio.
                  Music [within].
[aside] Now divine air! Now is his soul ravish'd! Is it not
strange that sheep's guts should hale souls out of men's bodies?
Well, a horn for my money, when all's done.
                                          [Balthasar sings.]
                  The Song.
    Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more!
      Men were deceivers ever,
    One foot in sea, and one on shore;
      To one thing constant never.
        Then sigh not so,
        But let them go,
      And be you blithe and bonny,
    Converting all your sounds of woe
      Into Hey nonny, nonny.
    Sing no more ditties, sing no moe,
      Of dumps so dull and heavy!
    The fraud of men was ever so,
      Since summer first was leavy.
        Then sigh not so, &c.
[aside] An he had been a dog that should have howl'd thus,
they would have hang'd him; and I pray God his bad voice bode no
mischief. I had as live have heard the night raven, come what
plague could have come after it.
[aside] Is't possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
[aside] I should think this a gull but that the white-bearded
fellow speaks it. Knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such
reverence.
This can be no trick. The conference was sadly borne; they
have the truth of this from Hero; they seem to pity the lady.
It seems her affections have their full bent. Love me? Why, it
must be requited. I hear how I am censur'd. They say I will bear
myself proudly if I perceive the love come from her. They say too
that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. I did
never think to marry. I must not seem proud. Happy are they that
hear their detractions and can put them to mending. They say the
lady is fair--'tis a truth, I can bear them witness; and virtuous
--'tis so, I cannot reprove it; and wise, but for loving me--by
my troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of
her folly, for I will be horribly in love with her. I may chance
have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me because I
have railed so long against marriage. But doth not the appetite
alters? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure
in his age. Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of
the brain awe a man from the career of his humour? No, the world
must be peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not
think I should live till I were married.
             Enter Beatrice.
Here comes Beatrice. By this day, she's a fair lady! I do spy
some marks of love in her.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
You take pleasure then in the message?
Ha! 'Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.'
There's a double meaning in that. 'I took no more pains for those
thanks than you took pains to thank me.' That's as much as to
say, 'Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks.' If I
do not take pity of her, I am a villain; if I do not love her, I
am a Jew. I will go get her picture.                   Exit.
Gallants, I am not as I have been.
I have the toothache.
Hang it!
Well, every one can master a grief but he that has it.
Yet is this no charm for the toothache. Old signior, walk
aside with me. I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak
to you, which these hobby-horses must not hear.
                              [Exeunt Benedick and Leonato.]
How now? interjections? Why then, some be of laughing, as,
ah, ha, he!
This looks not like a nuptial.
How doth the lady?
Sir, sir, be patient.
For my part, I am so attir'd in wonder,
I know not what to say.
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
Two of them have the very bent of honour;
And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
The practice of it lives in John the bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies.
Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you;
And though you know my inwardness and love
Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this
As secretly and justly as your soul
Should with your body.
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
I will not desire that.
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
Is there any way to show such friendship?
May a man do it?
I do love nothing in the world so well as you. Is not that
strange?
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat
it that says I love not you.
With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest I love
thee.
What offence, sweet Beatrice?
And do it with all thy heart.
Come, bid me do anything for thee.
Ha! not for the wide world!
Tarry, sweet Beatrice.
Beatrice--
We'll be friends first.
Is Claudio thine enemy?
Hear me, Beatrice!
Nay but Beatrice--
Beat--
Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wrong'd Hero?
Enough, I am engag'd, I will challenge him. I will kiss your
hand, and so I leave you. By this hand, Claudio shall render me a
dear account. As you hear of me, so think of me. Go comfort your
cousin. I must say she is dead-and so farewell.
                                                   [Exeunt.]
Good day, my lord.
In a false quarrel there is no true valour. I came to seek
you both.
It is in my scabbard. Shall I draw it?
Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career an you charge it
against me. I pray you choose another subject.
Shall I speak a word in your ear?
[aside to Claudio] You are a villain. I jest not; I will make
it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare. Do
me right, or I will protest your cowardice. You have kill'd a
sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me hear
from you.
Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.
Fare you well, boy; you know my mind. I will leave you now to
your gossiplike humour. You break jests as braggards do their
blades, which God be thanked hurt not. My lord, for your many
courtesies I thank you. I must discontinue your company. Your
brother the bastard is fled from Messina. You have among you
kill'd a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he
and I shall meet; and till then peace be with him.
                                                     [Exit.]
Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands
by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.
In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come
over it; for in most comely truth thou deservest it.
Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth--it catches.
A most manly wit, Margaret: it will not hurt a woman.
And so I pray thee call Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers.
If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a
vice, and they are dangerous weapons for maids.
And therefore will come.
                                              Exit Margaret.
   [Sings] The god of love,
           That sits above
       And knows me, and knows me,
         How pitiful I deserve--
I mean in singing; but in loving Leander the good swimmer,
Troilus the first employer of panders, and a whole book full of
these quondam carpet-mongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the
even road of a blank verse--why, they were never so truly turn'd
over and over as my poor self in love. Marry, I cannot show it in
rhyme. I have tried. I can find out no rhyme to 'lady' but 'baby'
--an innocent rhyme; for 'scorn,' 'horn'--a hard rhyme; for
'school', 'fool'--a babbling rhyme: very ominous endings! No, I
was not born under a rhyming planet, nor cannot woo in festival
terms.
                Enter Beatrice.
Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I call'd thee?
O, stay but till then!
Only foul words; and thereupon I will kiss thee.
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so
forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio
undergoes my challenge; and either I must shortly hear from him
or I will subscribe him a coward. And I pray thee now tell me,
for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me?
Suffer love!--a good epithet. I do suffer love indeed, for I
love thee against my will.
Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.
An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that liv'd in the time of
good neighbours. If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb
ere he dies, he shall live no longer in monument than the bell
rings and the widow weeps.
Question: why, an hour in clamour and a quarter in rheum.
Therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if Don Worm (his
conscience) find no impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet
of his own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for praising
myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy. And now
tell me, how doth your cousin?
And how do you?
Serve God, love me, and mend. There will I leave you too, for
here comes one in haste.
                     Enter Ursula.
I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried thy
eyes; and moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncle's.
                                                     Exeunt.
And so am I, being else by faith enforc'd
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
To bind me, or undo me--one of them.
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.
And I do with an eye of love requite her.
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical;
But, for my will, my will is, your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoin'd
In the state of honourable marriage;
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low,
And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow
And got a calf in that same noble feat
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
   Enter [Leonato's] brother [Antonio], Hero, Beatrice,
        Margaret, Ursula, [the ladies wearing masks].
Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice?
Do not you love me?
Why, then your uncle, and the Prince, and Claudio
Have been deceived; for they swore you did.
Troth, no; no more than reason.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.
'Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?
A miracle! Here's our own hands against our hearts.
Come, I will have thee; but, by this light, I take thee for pity.
Peace! I will stop your mouth.             [Kisses her.]
Come, come, we are friends. Let's have a dance ere we are
married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.
First, of my word! Therefore play, music. Prince, thou art
sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife! There is no staff more
reverent than one tipp'd with horn.
                   Enter Messenger.
Think not on him till to-morrow. I'll devise thee brave
punishments for him. Strike up, pipers!
                                            Dance. [Exeunt.]
