He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell you strange
news that you yet dreamt not of.
As the event stamps them; but they have a good cover, they
show well outward. The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a
thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by
a man of mine: the Prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my
niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it this night in a
dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the
present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.
A good sharp fellow. I will send for him, and question him
yourself.
I saw him not.
In faith, she's too curst.
[to Hero] Well, niece, I trust you will be rul'd by your
father.
At a word, I am not.
To tell you true, I counterfeit him.
At a word, I am not.
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
Against yourself.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.
Make those that do offend you suffer too.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.
If he could right himself with quarrelling,
Some of us would lie low.
Content yourself. God knows I lov'd my niece,
And she is dead, slander'd to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
Scambling, outfacing, fashion-monging boys,
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
Go anticly, show outward hideousness,
And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
And this is all.
Come, 'tis no matter.
Do not you meddle; let me deal in this.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
                                                Exeunt ambo.
              Enter Benedick.
Farewell, my lords. We look for you to-morrow.
Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
Which I will do with confirm'd countenance.
This same is she, and I do give you her.
