God save you, Sir John!
I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two bullets.
Then to you, Mistress Dorothy; I will charge you.
I know you, Mistress Dorothy.
God let me not live but I will murder your ruff for this.
Not I! I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear
her; I'll be reveng'd of her.
I'll see her damn'd first; to Pluto's damn'd lake, by this
hand, to th' infernal deep, with Erebus and tortures vile also.
Hold hook and line, say I. Down, down, dogs! down, faitors! Have
we not Hiren here?
These be good humours, indeed! Shall packhorses,
And hollow pamper'd jades of Asia,
Which cannot go but thirty mile a day,
Compare with Caesars, and with Cannibals,
And Troiant Greeks? Nay, rather damn them with
King Cerberus; and let the welkin roar.
Shall we fall foul for toys?
Die men like dogs! Give crowns like pins! Have we not Hiren
here?
Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis.
Come, give's some sack.
'Si fortune me tormente sperato me contento.'
Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend give fire.
Give me some sack; and, sweetheart, lie thou there.
                                     [Laying down his sword]
Come we to full points here, and are etceteras nothings?
Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What! we have seen the seven
stars.
Thrust him down stairs! Know we not Galloway nags?
What! shall we have incision? Shall we imbrue?
                                    [Snatching up his sword]
Then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days!
Why, then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds
Untwine the Sisters Three! Come, Atropos, I say!
Sir John, God save you!
Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. Sweet knight,
thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.
Puff!
Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base!
Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend,
And helter-skelter have I rode to thee;
And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys,
And golden times, and happy news of price.
A foutra for the world and worldlings base!
I speak of Africa and golden joys.
Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons?
And shall good news be baffled?
Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.
Why, then, lament therefore.
Under which king, Bezonian? Speak, or die.
Harry the Fourth- or Fifth?
A foutra for thine office!
Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is King;
Harry the Fifth's the man. I speak the truth.
When Pistol lies, do this; and fig me, like
The bragging Spaniard.
As nail in door. The things I speak are just.
What, I do bring good news?
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also!
'Where is the life that late I led?' say they.
Why, here it is; welcome these pleasant days!         Exeunt
God bless thy lungs, good knight!
'Tis 'semper idem' for 'obsque hoc nihil est.' 'Tis all in
every part.
My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver
And make thee rage.
Thy Doll, and Helen of thy noble thoughts,
Is in base durance and contagious prison;
Hal'd thither
By most mechanical and dirty hand.
Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto's snake,
For Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.
There roar'd the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
    Enter the KING and his train, the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
                           among them
The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!
Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta.
       Exeunt all but PRINCE JOHN and the LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
