Better than I was- hem.
A pox damn you, you muddy rascal! Is that all the comfort you
give me?
I make them! Gluttony and diseases make them: I make them
not.
Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.
Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!
Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogs-head?
There's a whole merchant's venture of Bourdeaux stuff in him; you
have not seen a hulk better stuff'd in the hold. Come, I'll be
friends with thee, Jack. Thou art going to the wars; and whether
I shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.
                        Re-enter FRANCIS
Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come hither; it is
the foul-mouth'dst rogue in England.
So you do, hostess.
Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion. What! you poor,
base, rascally, cheating, lack-linen mate! Away, you mouldy
rogue, away! I am meat for your master.
Away, you cut-purse rascal! you filthy bung, away! By this
wine, I'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps, an you play the
saucy cuttle with me. Away, you bottle-ale rascal! you
basket-hilt stale juggler, you! Since when, I pray you, sir?
God's light, with two points on your shoulder? Much!
Captain! Thou abominable damn'd cheater, art thou not ashamed
to be called captain? An captains were of my mind, they would
truncheon you out, for taking their names upon you before you
have earn'd them. You a captain! you slave, for what? For tearing
a poor whore's ruff in a bawdy-house? He a captain! hang him,
rogue! He lives upon mouldy stew'd prunes and dried cakes. A
captain! God's light, these villains will make the word as odious
as the word 'occupy'; which was an excellent good word before it
was ill sorted. Therefore captains had need look to't.
For God's sake thrust him down stairs; I cannot endure such a
fustian rascal.
I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee, do not draw.
I pray thee, Jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone. Ah, you
whoreson little valiant villain, you!
Ah, you sweet little rogue, you! Alas, poor ape, how thou
sweat'st! Come, let me wipe thy face. Come on, you whoreson
chops. Ah, rogue! i' faith, I love thee. Thou art as valorous as
Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better
than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!
Do, an thou dar'st for thy heart. An thou dost, I'll canvass
thee between a pair of sheets.
                      Enter musicians
I' faith, and thou follow'dst him like a church. Thou
whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig, when wilt thou leave
fighting a days and foining a nights, and begin to patch up thine
old body for heaven?
   Enter, behind, PRINCE HENRY and POINS disguised as drawers
Sirrah, what humour's the Prince of?
They say Poins has a good wit.
Why does the Prince love him so, then?
By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.
I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young boy of
them all.
By my troth, thou't set me a-weeping, an thou say'st so.
Prove that ever I dress myself handsome till thy return. Well,
hearken a' th' end.
How, you fat fool! I scorn you.
What says your Grace?
I cannot speak. If my heart be not ready to burst!
Well, sweet Jack, have a care of thyself.
Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. Come on; I'll tell thee what,
thou damn'd tripe-visag'd rascal, an the child I now go with do
miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou
paper-fac'd villain.
I'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will have you
as soundly swing'd for this- you blue-bottle rogue, you filthy
famish'd correctioner, if you be not swing'd, I'll forswear
half-kirtles.
Come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice.
Goodman death, goodman bones!
Come, you thin thing! come, you rascal!
