Before God, I am exceeding weary.
Faith, it does me; though it discolours the complexion of
my greatness to acknowledge it. Doth it not show vilely in me to
desire small beer?
Belike then my appetite was not-princely got; for, by my
troth, I do now remember the poor creature, small beer. But
indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my
greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name, or
to know thy face to-morrow, or to take note how many pair of silk
stockings thou hast- viz., these, and those that were thy
peach-colour'd ones- or to bear the inventory of thy shirts- as,
one for superfluity, and another for use! But that the
tennis-court-keeper knows better than I; for it is a low ebb of
linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there; as thou hast
not done a great while, because the rest of thy low countries
have made a shift to eat up thy holland. And God knows whether
those that bawl out of the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his
kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault;
whereupon the world increases, and kindreds are mightily
strengthened.
Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?
It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.
Marry, I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad, now
my father is sick; albeit I could tell to thee- as to one it
pleases me, for fault of a better, to call my friend- I could be
sad and sad indeed too.
By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devil's book
as thou and Falstaff for obduracy and persistency: let the end
try the man. But I tell thee my heart bleeds inwardly that my
father is so sick; and keeping such vile company as thou art hath
in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.
What wouldst thou think of me if I should weep?
It would be every man's thought; and thou art a blessed
fellow to think as every man thinks. Never a man's thought in the
world keeps the road-way better than thine. Every man would think
me an hypocrite indeed. And what accites your most worshipful
thought to think so?
And to thee.
And the boy that I gave Falstaff. 'A had him from me
Christian; and look if the fat villain have not transform'd him
ape.
And yours, most noble Bardolph!
Has not the boy profited?
Instruct us, boy; what dream, boy?
A crown's worth of good interpretation. There 'tis, boy.
                                            [Giving a crown]
And how doth thy master, Bardolph?
I do allow this well to be as familiar with me as my dog;
and he holds his place, for look you how he writes.
Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from
Japhet. But the letter:  [Reads]  'Sir John Falstaff, knight, to
the son of the King nearest his father, Harry Prince of Wales,
greeting.'
Peace!  [Reads]  'I will imitate the honourable Romans in
brevity.'-
 [Reads]  'I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I
leave thee. Be not too familiar with Poins; for he misuses thy
favours so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister Nell.
Repent at idle times as thou mayst, and so farewell.
  Thine, by yea and no- which is as much as to say as
    thou usest him- JACK FALSTAFF with my familiars,
    JOHN with my brothers and sisters, and SIR JOHN with
    all Europe.'
That's to make him eat twenty of his words. But do you use
me thus, Ned? Must I marry your sister?
Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits
of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us. Is your master here in
London?
Where sups he? Doth the old boar feed in the old frank?
What company?
Sup any women with him?
What pagan may that be?
Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull.
Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at supper?
Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph, no word to your master that
I am yet come to town. There's for your silence.
Fare you well; go.            Exeunt BARDOLPH and PAGE
This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.
How might we see Falstaff bestow himself to-night in his
true colours, and not ourselves be seen?
From a god to a bull? A heavy descension! It was Jove's
case. From a prince to a prentice? A low transformation! That
shall be mine; for in everything the purpose must weigh with the
folly. Follow me, Ned.
                                                      Exeunt
Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?
Look whe'er the wither'd elder hath not his poll claw'd
like a parrot.
Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction! What says th'
almanac to that?
Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou
lead!
Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.
YOU whoreson candle-mine, you, how vilely did you speak of
me even now before this honest, virtuous, civil gentlewoman!
Yea; and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by
Gadshill. You knew I was at your back, and spoke it on purpose to
try my patience.
I shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse, and
then I know how to handle you.
Not- to dispraise me, and call me pander, and
bread-chipper, and I know not what!
See now, whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not
make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us? Is
she of the wicked? Is thine hostess here of the wicked? Or is thy
boy of the wicked? Or honest Bardolph, whose zeal burns in his
nose, of the wicked?
For the women?
You, gentlewoman-
Peto, how now! What news?
By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame
So idly to profane the precious time,
When tempest of commotion, like the south,
Borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads.
Give me my sword and cloak. Falstaff, good night.
                    Exeunt PRINCE, POINS, PETO, and BARDOLPH
Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
How now! Rain within doors, and none abroad!
How doth the King?
Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.
If he be sick with joy, he'll recover without physic.
No; I will sit and watch here by the King.
                                   Exeunt all but the PRINCE
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
Being so troublesome a bedfellow?
O polish'd perturbation! golden care!
That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide
To many a watchful night! Sleep with it now!
Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet
As he whose brow with homely biggen bound
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty!
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit
Like a rich armour worn in heat of day
That scald'st with safety. By his gates of breath
There lies a downy feather which stirs not.
Did he suspire, that light and weightless down
Perforce must move. My gracious lord! my father!
This sleep is sound indeed; this is a sleep
That from this golden rigol hath divorc'd
So many English kings. Thy due from me
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood
Which nature, love, and filial tenderness,
Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously.
My due from thee is this imperial crown,
Which, as immediate from thy place and blood,
Derives itself to me.  [Putting on the crown]  Lo where it sits-
Which God shall guard; and put the world's whole strength
Into one giant arm, it shall not force
This lineal honour from me. This from thee
Will I to mine leave as 'tis left to me.                Exit
I never thought to hear you speak again.
O, pardon me, my liege! But for my tears,
The moist impediments unto my speech,
I had forestall'd this dear and deep rebuke
Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard
The course of it so far. There is your crown,
And he that wears the crown immortally
Long guard it yours!  [Kneeling]  If I affect it more
Than as your honour and as your renown,
Let me no more from this obedience rise,
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit
Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending!
God witness with me, when I here came in
And found no course of breath within your Majesty,
How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign,
O, let me in my present wildness die,
And never live to show th' incredulous world
The noble change that I have purposed!
Coming to look on you, thinking you dead-
And dead almost, my liege, to think you were-
I spake unto this crown as having sense,
And thus upbraided it: 'The care on thee depending
Hath fed upon the body of my father;
Therefore thou best of gold art worst of gold.
Other, less fine in carat, is more precious,
Preserving life in med'cine potable;
But thou, most fine, most honour'd, most renown'd,
Hast eat thy bearer up.' Thus, my most royal liege,
Accusing it, I put it on my head,
To try with it- as with an enemy
That had before my face murd'red my father-
The quarrel of a true inheritor.
But if it did infect my blood with joy,
Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride;
If any rebel or vain spirit of mine
Did with the least affection of a welcome
Give entertainment to the might of it,
Let God for ever keep it from my head,
And make me as the poorest vassal is,
That doth with awe and terror kneel to it!
My gracious liege,
You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me;
Then plain and right must my possession be;
Which I with more than with a common pain
'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.
   Enter PRINCE JOHN OF LANCASTER, WARWICK, LORDS, and others
My Lord of Warwick!
