I well allow the occasion of our amis;
But gladly would be better satisfied
How, in our means, we should advance ourselves
To look with forehead bold and big enough
Upon the power and puissance of the King.
Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground
And dash themselves to pieces.
                      Enter A MESSENGER
The just proportion that we gave them out.
Let us sway on and face them in the field.
                    Enter WESTMORELAND
I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.
Why not to him in part, and to us all
That feel the bruises of the days before,
And suffer the condition of these times
To lay a heavy and unequal hand
Upon our honours?
What thing, in honour, had my father lost
That need to be reviv'd and breath'd in me?
The King that lov'd him, as the state stood then,
Was force perforce compell'd to banish him,
And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he,
Being mounted and both roused in their seats,
Their neighing coursers daring of the spur,
Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down,
Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel,
And the loud trumpet blowing them together-
Then, then, when there was nothing could have stay'd
My father from the breast of Bolingbroke,
O, when the King did throw his warder down-
His own life hung upon the staff he threw-
Then threw he down himself, and all their lives
That by indictment and by dint of sword
Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.
But he hath forc'd us to compel this offer;
And it proceeds from policy, not love.
Well, by my will we shall admit no parley.
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
That no conditions of our peace can stand.
Yea, but our valuation shall be such
That every slight and false-derived cause,
Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason,
Shall to the King taste of this action;
That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
We shall be winnow'd with so rough a wind
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff,
And good from bad find no partition.
Be it so.
Here is return'd my Lord of Westmoreland.
                   Re-enter WESTMORELAND
Your Grace of York, in God's name then, set forward.
If not, we ready are to try our fortunes
To the last man.
You wish me health in very happy season,
For I am on the sudden something ill.
So much the worse, if your own rule be true.
                                             [Shouts within]
This had been cheerful after victory.
Is this proceeding just and honourable?
