Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome.
Alarbus goes to rest, and we survive
To tremble under Titus' threat'ning look.
Then, madam, stand resolv'd, but hope withal
The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy
With opportunity of sharp revenge
Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent
May favour Tamora, the Queen of Goths-
When Goths were Goths and Tamora was queen-
To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.
        Re-enter LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS, and
Chiron, thy years wants wit, thy wits wants edge
And manners, to intrude where I am grac'd,
And may, for aught thou knowest, affected be.
Why, boy, although our mother, unadvis'd,
Gave you a dancing rapier by your side,
Are you so desperate grown to threat your friends?
Go to; have your lath glued within your sheath
Till you know better how to handle it.
Ay, boy, grow ye so brave?              [They draw]
Not I, till I have sheath'd
My rapier in his bosom, and withal
Thrust those reproachful speeches down his throat
That he hath breath'd in my dishonour here.
Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner choice:
Lavina is thine elder brother's hope.
Why mak'st thou it so strange?
She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd;
She is a woman, therefore may be won;
She is Lavinia, therefore must be lov'd.
What, man! more water glideth by the mill
Than wots the miller of; and easy it is
Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know.
Though Bassianus be the Emperor's brother,
Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge.
Then why should he despair that knows to court it
With words, fair looks, and liberality?
What, hast not thou full often struck a doe,
And borne her cleanly by the keeper's nose?
Aaron, thou hast hit it.
Nor me, so I were one.
Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream
To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits,
Per Styga, per manes vehor.                           Exeunt
Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound,
But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground.             Exeunt
How now, dear sovereign, and our gracious mother!
Why doth your Highness look so pale and wan?
This is a witness that I am thy son.
                                           [Stabs BASSIANUS]
Stay, madam, here is more belongs to her;
First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw.
This minion stood upon her chastity,
Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty,
And with that painted hope braves your mightiness;
And shall she carry this unto her grave?
Listen, fair madam: let it be your glory
To see her tears; but be your heart to them
As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.
Away! for thou hast stay'd us here too long.
So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak,
Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee.
See how with signs and tokens she can scrowl.
She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash;
And so let's leave her to her silent walks.
If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord.
                                 Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON
       Wind horns. Enter MARCUS, from hunting
Gramercy, lovely Lucius. What's the news?
What's here? A scroll, and written round about.
Let's see:
[Reads]  'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
Non eget Mauri iaculis, nec arcu.'
But me more good to see so great a lord
Basely insinuate and send us gifts.
I would we had a thousand Roman dames
At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.
Come, let us go and pray to all the gods
For our beloved mother in her pains.
Why do the Emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
Soft! who comes here?
        Enter NURSE, with a blackamoor CHILD
Villain, what hast thou done?
And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone her.
Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice!
Accurs'd the offspring of so foul a fiend!
I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point.
Nurse, give it me; my sword shall soon dispatch it.
Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
By this our mother is for ever sham'd.
Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
And we will all subscribe to thy advice.
Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
How many women saw this child of his?
What mean'st thou, Aaron? Wherefore didst thou this?
For this care of Tamora,
Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.
     Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, bearing off the dead NURSE
Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.
Madam, depart at pleasure; leave us here.
