To cart her rather. She's too rough for me.
There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
And me, too, good Lord!
Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
You may go to the devil's dam; your gifts are so good
here's none will hold you. There! Love is not so great,
Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly
out; our cake's dough on both sides. Farewell; yet, for the love
I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man
to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her
father.
What's that, I pray?
A husband? a devil.
I say a devil. Think'st thou, Hortensio, though her father
be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with this
condition: to be whipp'd at the high cross every morning.
I am agreed; and would I had given him the best horse in
Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her,
and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.
                                 Exeunt GREMIO and HORTENSIO
O, very well; I have perus'd the note.
Hark you, sir; I'll have them very fairly bound-
All books of love, see that at any hand;
And see you read no other lectures to her.
You understand me- over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfum'd;
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
O this learning, what a thing it is!
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promis'd to enquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca;
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man; for learning and behaviour
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books- good ones, I warrant ye.
Beloved of me- and that my deeds shall prove.
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman?
O Sir, such a life with such a wife were strange!
But if you have a stomach, to't a God's name;
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?
Hortensio, hark:
This gentleman is happily arriv'd,
My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
And so we will- provided that he win her.
Hark you, sir, you mean not her to-
No; if without more words you will get you hence.
But so is not she.
For this reason, if you'll know,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
What, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules,
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.
You are too blunt; go to it orderly.
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
Let us that are poor petitioners speak too.
Bacare! you are marvellous forward.
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing.
Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it. To
express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly
beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young
scholar  [Presenting LUCENTIO]  that hath been long studying at
Rheims; as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the
other in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio. Pray accept
his service.
Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee hang'd first.
Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter:
Now is the day we long have looked for;
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back; 'tis age that nourisheth.
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needle-work;
Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs
To house or housekeeping. Then at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
And if I die to-morrow this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
[Aside]  My land amounts not to so much in all.-
That she shall have, besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marseilles road.
What, have I chok'd you with an argosy?
Nay, I have off'red all; I have no more;
And she can have no more than all I have;
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
And may not young men die as well as old?
Adieu, good neighbour.                   Exit BAPTISTA
Now, I fear thee not.
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.              Exit
As willingly as e'er I came from school.
A bridegroom, say you? 'Tis a groom indeed,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
Why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool, to him!
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
'Ay, by gogs-wouns' quoth he, and swore so loud
That, all amaz'd, the priest let fall the book;
And as he stoop'd again to take it up,
This mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.
'Now take them up,' quoth he 'if any list.'
Trembled and shook, for why he stamp'd and swore
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done
He calls for wine: 'A health!' quoth he, as if
He had been abroad, carousing to his mates
After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel,
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
Having no other reason
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck,
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo.
And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before.
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.         [Music plays]
   Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, BIANCA, BAPTISTA, HORTENSIO,
                     GRUMIO, and train
Let me entreat you.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
       Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, VINCENTIO, GRUMIO,
                      and ATTENDANTS
They're busy within; you were best knock louder.
                            [PEDANT looks out of the window]
Stay, Officer; he shall not go to prison.
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catch'd in
this business; I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.
Nay, I dare not swear it.
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
Here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
My cake is dough, but I'll in among the rest;
Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.           Exit
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
Ay, and a kind one too.
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
