Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star
Chamber matter of it; if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs,
he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalorum.
Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
hundred years.
It is an old coat.
The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old
coat.
You may, by marrying.
Not a whit.
The Council shall hear it; it is a riot.
Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword
should end it.
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
I know the young gentlewoman; she has good
gifts.
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff
there?
Master Page, I am glad to see you; much good do
it your good heart! I wish'd your venison better; it was ill
kill'd. How doth good Mistress Page?-and I thank you
always with my heart, la! with my heart.
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
That he will not. 'Tis your fault; 'tis your fault;
'tis a good dog.
Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog. Can there be
more said? He is good, and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff here?
He hath wrong'd me, Master Page.
If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that
so, Master Page? He hath wrong'd me; indeed he hath; at a
word, he hath, believe me; Robert Shallow, esquire, saith
he is wronged.
Knight, you have beaten my men, kill'd my deer,
and broke open my lodge.
Tut, a pin! this shall be answer'd.
The Council shall know this.
Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word
with you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a
tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh here. Do
you understand me?
Nay, but understand me.
Ay, there's the point, sir.
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry,
marry her?
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz; what
I do is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
Here comes fair Mistress Anne. Would I were
young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne!
 [Exit SIMPLE]  A justice of peace sometime may
be beholding to his friend for a man. I keep but three men
and a boy yet, till my mother be dead. But what though?
Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.
I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and
twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go with
us? We have sport in hand.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh
the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.
 [To PAGE] Will you go with us to behold it? My
merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and,
I think, hath appointed them contrary places; for, believe
me, I hear the parson is no jester. Hark, I will tell you
what our sport shall be.               [They converse apart]
Have with you, mine host.
Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these
times you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and
I know not what. 'Tis the heart, Master Page; 'tis here,
'tis here. I have seen the time with my long sword I would
have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.
Save you, Master Doctor Caius!
He is the wiser man, Master Doctor: he is a curer
of souls, and you a curer of bodies; if you should fight,
you go against the hair of your professions. Is it not true,
Master Page?
Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old, and
of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make
one. Though we are justices, and doctors, and churchmen,
Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in us; we are
the sons of women, Master Page.
It will be found so, Master Page. Master Doctor
you have show'd yourself a wise physician, and Sir Hugh
hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman. You
must go with me, Master Doctor.
 [Aside]  We will do it.
                           Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
How now, Master Parson! Good morrow, good
Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student
 from his book, and it is wonderful.
What, the sword and the word! Do you study
them both, Master Parson?
I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never
heard a man of his place, gravity, and learning, so wide of
his own respect.
It appears so, by his weapons. Keep them asunder;
here comes Doctor Caius.
             Enter HOST, CAIUS, and RUGBY
So do you, good Master Doctor.
Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, follow.
I must excuse myself, Master Ford.
We have linger'd about a match between Anne
Page and my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have
our answer.
Well, fare you well; we shall have the freer
wooing at Master Page's.          Exeunt SHALLOW and SLENDER
Break their talk, Mistress Quickly; my kinsman
shall speak for himself.
Be not dismay'd.
She's coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a
father!
Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds
jointure.
Marry, I thank you for it; I thank you for that
good comfort. She calls you, coz; I'll leave you.
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford; this
wrongs you.
That's good too; but what needs either your mum
or her budget? The white will decipher her well enough.
It hath struck ten o'clock.
