Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
  And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner;
  Good sister, let us dine, and never fret.
  A man is master of his liberty;
  Time is their master, and when they see time,
  They'll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.
Because their business still lies out o' door.
O, know he is the bridle of your will.
Why, headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe.
  There's nothing situate under heaven's eye
  But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky.
  The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
  Are their males' subjects, and at their controls.
  Man, more divine, the master of all these,
  Lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas,
  Indu'd with intellectual sense and souls,
  Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls,
  Are masters to their females, and their lords;
  Then let your will attend on their accords.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.
Ere I learn love, I'll practise to obey.
Till he come home again, I would forbear.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
  Here comes your man, now is your husband nigh.

Enter DROMIO OF EPHESUS

Spake he so doubtfully thou could'st not feel his meaning?
Quoth who?
Fie, how impatience loureth in your face!
Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence.
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
Fie, brother, how the world is chang'd with you!
  When were you wont to use my sister thus?
  She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
Why prat'st thou to thyself, and answer'st not?
  Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot!
If thou art chang'd to aught, 'tis to an ass.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.
And may it be that you have quite forgot
  A husband's office? Shall, Antipholus,
  Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
  Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous?
  If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
  Then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness;
  Or, if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth;
  Muffle your false love with some show of blindness;
  Let not my sister read it in your eye;
  Be not thy tongue thy own shame's orator;
  Look sweet, speak fair, become disloyalty;
  Apparel vice like virtue's harbinger;
  Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted;
  Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint;
  Be secret-false. What need she be acquainted?
  What simple thief brags of his own attaint?
  'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed
  And let her read it in thy looks at board;
  Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
  Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word.
  Alas, poor women! make us but believe,
  Being compact of credit, that you love us;
  Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
  We in your motion turn, and you may move us.
  Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
  Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife.
  'Tis holy sport to be a little vain
  When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
What, are you mad, that you do reason so?
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
Why call you me love? Call my sister so.
That's my sister.
All this my sister is, or else should be.
O, soft, sir, hold you still;
  I'll fetch my sister to get her good will.
First he denied you had in him no right.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
Then pleaded I for you.
That love I begg'd for you he begg'd of me.
With words that in an honest suit might move.
  First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Have patience, I beseech.
Who would be jealous then of such a one?
  No evil lost is wail'd when it is gone.
How hast thou lost thy breath?
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
And I am witness with her that she did.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!
God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.
She never reprehended him but mildly,
  When he demean'd himself rough, rude, and wildly.
  Why bear you these rebukes, and answer not?
Complain unto the Duke of this indignity.
Kneel to the Duke before he pass the abbey.

Enter the DUKE, attended; AEGEON, bareheaded;
with the HEADSMAN and other OFFICERS

Ne'er may I look on day nor sleep on night
  But she tells to your Highness simple truth!
