In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace, and
Coram.
Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentleman born,
Master Parson, who writes himself 'Armigero' in any bill,
warrant, quittance, or obligation-'Armigero.'
All his successors, gone before him, hath done't;
and all his ancestors, that come after him, may: they may
give the dozen white luces in their coat.
I may quarter, coz.
Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and
speaks small like a woman.
How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say
he was outrun on Cotsall.
You'll not confess, you'll not confess.
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym,
and Pistol. They carried me to the tavern, and made me
drunk, and afterwards pick'd my pocket.
Ay, it is no matter.
Ay, it is no matter.
Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
Ay, by these gloves, did he-or I would I might
never come in mine own great chamber again else!-of
seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
shovel-boards that cost me two shilling and two pence apiece
of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for
though I cannot remember what I did when you made me
drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no matter;
I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again, but in honest,
civil, godly company, for this trick. If I be drunk, I'll be
drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with
drunken knaves.
O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.
I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of
Songs and Sonnets here.
                      Enter SIMPLE
How, Simple! Where have you been? I must wait on
myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles about you,
have you?
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so, I
shall do that that is reason.
So I do, sir.
Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says; I pray
you pardon me; he's a justice of peace in his country,
simple though I stand here.
Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
reasonable demands.
I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that
would do reason.
I will do a greater thing than that upon your request,
cousin, in any reason.
I will marry her, sir, at your request; but if there
be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease
it upon better acquaintance, when we are married and
have more occasion to know one another. I hope upon
familiarity will grow more contempt. But if you say
'marry her,' I will marry her; that I am freely dissolved,
and dissolutely.
Ay, or else I would I might be hang'd, la!
                   Re-enter ANNE PAGE
No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very
well.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. Go,
sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my cousin
I' faith, I'll eat nothing; I thank you as much as
though I did.
I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruis'd my
shin th' other day with playing at sword and dagger with
a master of fence-three veneys for a dish of stew'd prunes
-and, I with my ward defending my head, he hot my shin,
and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat
since. Why do your dogs bark so? Be there bears i' th'
town?
I love the sport well; but I shall as soon quarrel at
it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see the
bear loose, are you not?
That's meat and drink to me now. I have seen
Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by the
chain; but I warrant you, the women have so cried and
shriek'd at it that it pass'd; but women, indeed, cannot
abide 'em; they are very ill-favour'd rough things.
                     Re-enter PAGE
I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
Nay, pray you lead the way.
Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.
Truly, I will not go first; truly, la! I will not do
you that wrong.
I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome. You
do yourself wrong indeed, la!                         Exeunt
Give you good morrow, sir.
 [Aside]  Ah, sweet Anne Page!
 [Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
 [Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
                              Exeunt all but CAIUS and EVANS
And so must I, sir; we have appointed to dine with
Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her for more
money than I'll speak of.
I hope I have your good will, father Page.
I'll make a shaft or a bolt on 't; 'slid, 'tis but
venturing.
No, she shall not dismay me. I care not for that,
but that I am afeard.
I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell
you good jests of him. Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress Anne
the jest how my father stole two geese out of a pen, good
uncle.
Ay, that I do; as well as I love any woman in
Gloucestershire.
Ay, that I will come cut and longtail, under the
degree of a squire.
Now, good Mistress Anne-
My Will! 'Od's heartlings, that's a pretty jest
indeed! I ne'er made my will yet, I thank heaven; I am not
such a sickly creature, I give heaven praise.
Truly, for mine own part I would little or nothing
with you. Your father and my uncle hath made motions;
if it be my luck, so; if not, happy man be his dole! They
can tell you how things go better than I can. You may ask
your father; here he comes.
        Enter PAGE and MISTRESS PAGE
Ay, forsooth; I have spoke with her, and we have
a nay-word how to know one another. I come to her in
white and cry 'mum'; she cries 'budget,' and by that we
know one another.
Whoa, ho, ho, father Page!
Dispatch'd! I'll make the best in Gloucestershire
know on't; would I were hang'd, la, else!
I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne
Page, and she's a great lubberly boy. If it had not been i'
th' church, I would have swing'd him, or he should have
swing'd me. If I did not think it had been Anne Page,
would I might never stir!-and 'tis a postmaster's boy.
What need you tell me that? I think so, when I
took a boy for a girl. If I had been married to him, for all
he was in woman's apparel, I would not have had him.
I went to her in white and cried 'mum' and she
cried 'budget' as Anne and I had appointed; and yet it was
not Anne, but a postmaster's boy.
