 [Aside]  If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
 [Grovelling on the ground]  O that ever I was born!
O, help me, help me! Pluck but off these rags; and then,
death, death!
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offend me more than the
stripes I have received, which are mighty ones and millions.
I am robb'd, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel ta'en
from me, and these detestable things put upon me.
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
O, good sir, softly, good sir; I fear, sir, my shoulder
blade is out.
Softly, dear sir  [Picks his pocket];  good sir, softly.
You ha' done me a charitable office.
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir. I have a
kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, unto whom I was
going; I shall there have money or anything I want. Offer me no
money, I pray you; that kills my heart.
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with
troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the Prince. I cannot
tell, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he was
certainly whipt out of the court.
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well; he hath
been since an ape-bearer; then a process-server, a bailiff; then
he compass'd a motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
wife within a mile where my land and living lies; and, having
flown over many knavish professions, he settled only in rogue.
Some call him Autolycus.
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that put
me into this apparel.
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter; I am false
of heart that way, and that he knew, I warrant him.
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and walk.
I will even take my leave of you and pace softly towards my
kinsman's.
No, good-fac'd sir; no, sweet sir.
Prosper you, sweet sir!                  Exit CLOWN
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice. I'll be with
you at your sheep-shearing too. If I make not this cheat bring
out another, and the shearers prove sheep, let me be unroll'd,
and my name put in the book of virtue!
                                                     [Sings]
        Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
          And merrily hent the stile-a;
        A merry heart goes all the day,
          Your sad tires in a mile-a.                   Exit
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad; therefore it
behoves men to be wary.
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of
charge.
Here's one to a very doleful tune: how a usurer's wife
was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a burden, and how she
long'd to eat adders' heads and toads carbonado'd.
Very true, and but a month old.
Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress Taleporter,
and five or six honest wives that were present. Why should I
carry lies abroad?
Here's another ballad, of a fish that appeared upon the
coast on Wednesday the fourscore of April, forty thousand fathom
above water, and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of
maids. It was thought she was a woman, and was turn'd into a cold
fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that lov'd her.
The ballad is very pitiful, and as true.
Five justices' hands at it; and witnesses more than my
pack will hold.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Why, this is a passing merry one, and goes to the tune
of 'Two maids wooing a man.' There's scarce a maid westward but
she sings it; 'tis in request, I can tell you.
I can bear my part; you must know 'tis my occupation.
Have at it with you.
                    SONG
Get you hence, for I must go
         Where it fits not you to know.
Neither.
Neither.
And you shall pay well for 'em.
                                     Exit AUTOLYCUS, Singing
         Will you buy any tape,
         Or lace for your cape,
       My dainty duck, my dear-a?
         Any silk, any thread,
         Any toys for your head,
       Of the new'st and fin'st, fin'st wear-a?
         Come to the pedlar;
         Money's a meddler
       That doth utter all men's ware-a.
               Re-enter SERVANT
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his sworn
brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold all my trumpery;
not a counterfeit stone, not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch,
table-book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet,
horn-ring, to keep my pack from fasting. They throng who should
buy first, as if my trinkets had been hallowed and brought a
benediction to the buyer; by which means I saw whose purse was
best in picture; and what I saw, to my good use I rememb'red. My
clown, who wants but something to be a reasonable man, grew so in
love with the wenches' song that he would not stir his pettitoes
till he had both tune and words, which so drew the rest of the
herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears. You might
have pinch'd a placket, it was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a
codpiece of a purse; I would have fil'd keys off that hung in
chains. No hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song, and admiring
the nothing of it. So that in this time of lethargy I pick'd and
cut most of their festival purses; and had not the old man come
in with whoobub against his daughter and the King's son and
scar'd my choughs from the chaff, I had not left a purse alive in
the whole army.
          CAMILLO, FLORIZEL, and PERDITA come forward
 [Aside]  If they have overheard me now- why, hanging.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
I am a poor fellow, sir.  [Aside]  I know ye well
enough.
Are you in camest, sir?  [Aside]  I smell the trick
on't.
Indeed, I have had earnest; but I cannot with conscience
take it.
Adieu, sir.
I understand the business, I hear it. To have an open
ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a
cut-purse; a good nose is requisite also, to smell out work for
th' other senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth
thrive. What an exchange had this been without boot! What a boot
is here with this exchange! Sure, the gods do this year connive
at us, and we may do anything extempore. The Prince himself is
about a piece of iniquity- stealing away from his father with his
clog at his heels. If I thought it were a piece of honesty to
acquaint the King withal, I would not do't. I hold it the more
knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my
profession.
               Re-enter CLOWN and SHEPHERD
Aside, aside- here is more matter for a hot brain. Every lane's
end, every shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man
work.
 [Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!
 [Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaint may
be to the flight of my master.
 [Aside]  Though I am not naturally honest, I am so
sometimes by chance. Let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.
[Takes off his false beard]  How now, rustics! Whither are you
bound?
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition of
that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your names, your ages,
of what having, breeding, and anything that is fitting to be
known- discover.
A lie: you are rough and hairy. Let me have no lying; it
becomes none but tradesmen, and they often give us soldiers the
lie; but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing
steel; therefore they do not give us the lie.
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest thou
not the air of the court in these enfoldings? Hath not my gait in
it the measure of the court? Receives not thy nose court-odour
from me? Reflect I not on thy baseness court-contempt? Think'st
thou, for that I insinuate, that toaze from thee thy business, I
am therefore no courtier? I am courtier cap-a-pe, and one that
will either push on or pluck back thy business there; whereupon I
command the to open thy affair.
What advocate hast thou to him?
How blessed are we that are not simple men!
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.
The fardel there? What's i' th' fardel? Wherefore that
box?
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
The King is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a new
ship to purge melancholy and air himself; for, if thou be'st
capable of things serious, thou must know the King is full of
grief.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly; the
curses he shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the
back of man, the heart of monster.
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy and
vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to him, though
remov'd fifty times, shall all come under the hangman- which,
though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. An old
sheep-whistling rogue, a ram-tender, to offer to have his
daughter come into grace! Some say he shall be ston'd; but that
death is too soft for him, say I. Draw our throne into a
sheep-cote!- all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
He has a son- who shall be flay'd alive; then 'nointed
over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest; then stand
till he be three quarters and a dram dead; then recover'd again
with aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as he is,
and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall he be set
against a brick wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon
him, where he is to behold him with flies blown to death. But
what talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries are to be
smil'd at, their offences being so capital? Tell me, for you seem
to be honest plain men, what you have to the King. Being
something gently consider'd, I'll bring you where he is aboard,
tender your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfs;
and if it be in man besides the King to effect your suits, here
is man shall do it.
After I have done what I promised?
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this
business?
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son! Hang him,
he'll be made an example.
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side; go on
the right-hand; I will but look upon the hedge, and follow you.
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not
suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am courted now with a
double occasion- gold, and a means to do the Prince my master
good; which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement? I
will bring these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him. If he
think it fit to shore them again, and that the complaint they
have to the King concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for
being so far officious; for I am proof against that title, and
what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present them. There
may be matter in it.                                    Exit
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
I would most gladly know the issue of it.
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, would
preferment drop on my head. I brought the old man and his son
aboard the Prince; told him I heard them talk of a fardel and I
know not what; but he at that time over-fond of the shepherd's
daughter- so he then took her to be- who began to be much
sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of weather
continuing, this mystery remained undiscover'd. But 'tis all one
to me; for had I been the finder-out of this secret, it would not
have relish'd among my other discredits.
                Enter SHEPHERD and CLOWN
Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already
appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I
have committed to your worship, and to give me your good report
to the Prince my master.
Ay, an it like your good worship.
I will prove so, sir, to my power.
