Why should he then protect our sovereign,
He being of age to govern of himself?
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk,
We'll quickly hoise Duke Humphrey from his seat.
Or thou or I, Somerset, will be Protector,
Despite Duke Humphrey or the Cardinal.
                              Exeunt BUCKINGHAM and SOMERSET
All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.
Thy cruelty in execution
Upon offenders hath exceeded law,
And left thee to the mercy of the law.
Lord Cardinal, I will follow Eleanor,
And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds.
She's tickled now; her fume needs no spurs,
She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.            Exit
                  Re-enter GLOUCESTER
True, madam, none at all. What can you this?
Away with them! let them be clapp'd up close,
And kept asunder. You, madam, shall with us.
Stafford, take her to thee.
We'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming.
All, away!
            Exeunt, above, DUCHESS and HUME, guarded; below,
                   WITCH, SOUTHWELL and BOLINGBROKE, guarded
Your Grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,
To be the post, in hope of his reward.
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold:
A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
Under the countenance and confederacy
Of Lady Eleanor, the Protector's wife,
The ringleader and head of all this rout,
Have practis'd dangerously against your state,
Dealing with witches and with conjurers,
Whom we have apprehended in the fact,
Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henry's life and death
And other of your Highness' Privy Council,
As more at large your Grace shall understand.
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Humphrey.
He'll wrest the sense, and hold us here all day.
Lord Cardinal, he is your prisoner.
What answer makes your Grace to the rebels'
supplication?
My gracious lord, retire to Killingworth
Until a power be rais'd to put them down.
Then linger not, my lord; away, take horse.
Trust nobody, for fear you be betray'd.
Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee.
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the King
Unto the commons whom thou hast misled;
And here pronounce free pardon to them all
That will forsake thee and go home in peace.
What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him;
And he that brings his head unto the King
Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
                                         Exeunt some of them
Follow me, soldiers; we'll devise a mean
To reconcile you all unto the King.                   Exeunt
Health and glad tidings to your Majesty!
I will, my lord, and doubt not so to deal
As all things shall redound unto your good.
York, if thou meanest well I greet thee well.
A messenger from Henry, our dread liege,
To know the reason of these arms in peace;
Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
That is too much presumption on thy part;
But if thy arms be to no other end,
The King hath yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.
York, I commend this kind submission.
We twain will go into his Highness' tent.
              Enter the KING, and attendants
So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss
He were created knight for his good service.
