They want their porridge and their fat bull
beeves.
Either they must be dieted like mules
And have their provender tied to their mouths,
Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records
England all Olivers and Rowlands bred
During the time Edward the Third did reign.
More truly now may this be verified;
For none but Samsons and Goliases
It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!
Lean raw-bon'd rascals! Who would e'er suppose
They had such courage and audacity?
Be it so.
               Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock;
Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.
He may mean more than we poor men do know;
These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
All France will be replete with mirth and joy
When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.
How now, my lords? What, all unready so?
Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms
Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous or desperate than this.
Here cometh Charles; I marvel how he sped.
                Enter CHARLES and LA PUCELLE
Had all your quarters been as safely kept
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surpris'd.
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower;
Which once discern'd shows that her meaning is
No way to that, for weakness, which she ent'red.
         Enter LA PUCELLE, on the top, thrusting out
                     a torch burning
Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends;
Enter, and cry 'The Dauphin!' presently,
And then do execution on the watch. Alarum.           Exeunt
          An alarum. Enter TALBOT in an excursion
Signior, no.
For ever should they be expuls'd from France,
And not have tide of an earldom here.
Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this,
And doth deserve a coronet of gold.
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.
Must he be then as shadow of himself?
Adorn his temples with a coronet
And yet, in substance and authority,
Retain but privilege of a private man?
This proffer is absurd and reasonless.
 [To CHARLES]  To say the truth, it is your policy
To save your subjects from such massacre
And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
By our proceeding in hostility;
And therefore take this compact of a truce,
Although you break it when your pleasure serves.
