Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.
YOU are all resolv'd rather to die than to famish?
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the
people.
Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own
price. Is't a verdict?
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
What authority surfeits on would relieve us; if they would yield
us but the superfluity while it were wholesome, we might guess
they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear. The
leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
inventory to particularize their abundance; our sufferance is a
gain to them. Let us revenge this with our pikes ere we become
rakes; for the gods know I speak this in hunger for bread, not in
thirst for revenge.
Against him first; he's a very dog to the
commonalty.
Very well, and could be content to give him good
report for't but that he pays himself with being proud.
I say unto you, what he hath done famously he did it
to that end; though soft-conscienc'd men can be content to say it
was for his country, he did it to please his mother and to be
partly proud, which he is, even to the altitude of his virtue.
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.  [Shouts
within]  What shouts are these? The other side o' th' city is
risen. Why stay we prating here? To th' Capitol!
Soft! who comes here?
                   Enter MENENIUS AGRIPPA
He's one honest enough; would all the rest were so!
Our business is not unknown to th' Senate; they have
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll
show 'em in deeds. They say poor suitors have strong breaths;
they shall know we have strong arms too.
We cannot, sir; we are undone already.
Care for us! True, indeed! They ne'er car'd for us
yet. Suffer us to famish, and their storehouses cramm'd with
grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily
any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more
piercing statutes daily to chain up and restrain the poor. If the
wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear
us.
Well, I'll hear it, sir; yet you must not think to
fob off our disgrace with a tale. But, an't please you, deliver.
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
Your belly's answer- What?
The kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter,
With other muniments and petty helps
Is this our fabric, if that they-
Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
Who is the sink o' th' body-
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?
Y'are long about it.
Ay, sir; well, well.
It was an answer. How apply you this?
I the great toe? Why the great toe?
We have ever your good word.
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to
deny him.
And to make us no better thought of, a little help
will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck
not to call us the many-headed multitude.
The price is to ask it kindly.
He has our voices, sir.
No, 'tis his kind of speech- he did not mock us.
I twice five hundred, and their friends to piece
'em.
He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths,
And we their hands.
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees
Are bound to pray for you both.
For mine own part,
When I said banish him, I said 'twas pity.
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home. I
ever said we were i' th' wrong when we banish'd him.
