He was a king bless'd of the King of kings;
Unto the French the dreadful judgment-day
So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
The battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought;
The Church's prayers made him so prosperous.
Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art
Protector
And lookest to command the Prince and realm.
Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe
More than God or religious churchmen may.
What! Wherein Talbot overcame? Is't so?
 [Aside]  Each hath his place and function to
attend:
I am left out; for me nothing remains.
But long I will not be Jack out of office.
The King from Eltham I intend to steal,
And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.             Exeunt
                      SCENE 2.
              France. Before Orleans
  Sound a flourish. Enter CHARLES THE DAUPHIN, ALENCON,
       and REIGNIER, marching with drum and soldiers
How now, ambitious Humphry! What means
this?
I do, thou most usurping proditor,
And not Protector of the King or realm.
Nay, stand thou back; I will not budge a foot.
This be Damascus; be thou cursed Cain,
To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.
Do what thou dar'st; I beard thee to thy face.
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the
Pope.
Here's Gloucester, a foe to citizens;
One that still motions war and never peace,
O'ercharging your free purses with large fines;
That seeks to overthrow religion,
Because he is Protector of the realm,
And would have armour here out of the Tower,
To crown himself King and suppress the Prince.
Gloucester, we'll meet to thy cost, be sure;
Thy heart-blood I will have for this day's work.
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head,
For I intend to have it ere long.
                Exeunt, severally, GLOUCESTER and WINCHESTER
                                         with their servants
Com'st thou with deep premeditated lines,
With written pamphlets studiously devis'd?
Humphrey of Gloucester, if thou canst accuse
Or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge,
Do it without invention, suddenly;
I with sudden and extemporal speech
Purpose to answer what thou canst object.
Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious, or perverse,
As he will have me, how am I so poor?
Or how haps it I seek not to advance
Or raise myself, but keep my wonted calling?
And for dissension, who preferreth peace
More than I do, except I be provok'd?
No, my good lords, it is not that offends;
It is not that that incens'd hath incens'd the Duke:
It is because no one should sway but he;
No one but he should be about the King;
And that engenders thunder in his breast
And makes him roar these accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good
Ay, lordly sir; for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in another's throne?
And am not I a prelate of the church?
Unreverent Gloucester!
Rome shall remedy this.
He shall submit, or I will never yield.
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;
Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.
heart.
See here, my friends and loving countrymen:
This token serveth for a flag of truce
Betwixt ourselves and all our followers.
So help me God, as I dissemble not!
As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.
God save King Henry, of that name the Sixth!
Stay, my Lord Legate; you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be delivered to his Holiness
For clothing me in these grave ornaments.
 [Aside]  Now Winchester will not submit, I
trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive
That neither in birth or for authority
The Bishop will be overborne by thee.
I'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
Or sack this country with a mutiny.                   Exeunt
                          SCENE 2.
                   France. Plains in Anjou
          Enter CHARLES, BURGUNDY, ALENCON, BASTARD,
               REIGNIER, LA PUCELLE, and forces
