I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than
 Cornwall.
Is not this your son, my lord?
I cannot conceive you.
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
 proper.
I must love you, and sue to know you better.
Good my liege-
Royal Lear,
 Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
 Lov'd as my father, as my master follow'd,
 As my great patron thought on in my prayers-
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
 The region of my heart! Be Kent unmannerly
 When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
 Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
 When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound
 When majesty falls to folly. Reverse thy doom;
 And in thy best consideration check
 This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment,
 Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
 Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
 Reverbs no hollowness.
My life I never held but as a pawn
 To wage against thine enemies; nor fear to lose it,
 Thy safety being the motive.
See better, Lear, and let me still remain
 The true blank of thine eye.
Now by Apollo, King,
 Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
Do!
 Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
 Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
 Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
 I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
Fare thee well, King. Since thus thou wilt appear,
 Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
 [To Cordelia] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
 That justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
 [To Regan and Goneril] And your large speeches may your deeds
    approve,
 That good effects may spring from words of love.
 Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
 He'll shape his old course in a country new.
If but as well I other accents borrow,
 That can my speech defuse, my good intent
 May carry through itself to that full issue
 For which I raz'd my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
 If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
 So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov'st,
 Shall find thee full of labours.
     Horns within. Enter Lear, [Knights,] and Attendants.
A man, sir.
I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly
 that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to
 converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear
 judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.
Service.
You.
No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would
 fain call master.
Authority.
I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in
 telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which
 ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of me
 is diligence.
Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to
 dote on her for anything. I have years on my back forty-eight.
Nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
                                        [Trips up his heels.
Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences. Away,
 away! If you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry; but
 away! Go to! Have you wisdom? So.
                                           [Pushes him out.]
Why, fool?
This is nothing, fool.
This is not altogether fool, my lord.
I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.
Ay.
I' th' mire.
I love thee not.
If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for
 me.
Fellow, I know thee.
A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
 shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
 worsted-stocking knave; a lily-liver'd, action-taking, whoreson,
 glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue;
 one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
 good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave,
 beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch;
 one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the
 least syllable of thy addition.
What a brazen-fac'd varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me!
 Is it two days ago since I beat thee and tripp'd up thy heels
 before the King? [Draws his sword.] Draw, you rogue! for, though
 it be night, yet the moon shines. I'll make a sop o' th'
 moonshine o' you. Draw, you whoreson cullionly barbermonger!
 draw!
Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against the King, and
 take Vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father.
 Draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado your shanks! Draw, you
 rascal! Come your ways!
Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave!
 Strike!                                        [Beats him.]
With you, goodman boy, an you please! Come, I'll flesh ye!
 Come on, young master!
No marvel, you have so bestirr'd your valour. You cowardly
 rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.
Ay, a tailor, sir. A stonecutter or a painter could not have
 made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.
Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if
 you'll give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into
 mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. 'Spare my grey
 beard,' you wagtail?
Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
 Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
 Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
 Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
 That in the natures of their lords rebel,
 Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
 Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
 With every gale and vary of their masters,
 Knowing naught (like dogs) but following.
 A plague upon your epileptic visage!
 Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
 Goose, an I had you upon Sarum Plain,
 I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
No contraries hold more antipathy
 Than I and such a knave.
His countenance likes me not.
Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain.
 I have seen better faces in my time
 Than stands on any shoulder that I see
 Before me at this instant.
Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
 Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
 Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
 On flickering Phoebus' front-
To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I
 know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguil'd you in a plain
 accent was a plain knave, which, for my part, I will not be,
 though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to't.
None of these rogues and cowards
 But Ajax is their fool.
Sir, I am too old to learn.
 Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King;
 On whose employment I was sent to you.
 You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
 Against the grace and person of my master,
 Stocking his messenger.
Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
 You should not use me so.
Pray do not, sir. I have watch'd and travell'd hard.
 Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
 A good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
 Give you good morrow!
Good King, that must approve the common saw,
 Thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
 To the warm sun!
 Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
 That by thy comfortable beams I may
 Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
 But misery. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
 Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
 Of my obscured course- and [reads] 'shall find time
 From this enormous state, seeking to give
 Losses their remedies'- All weary and o'erwatch'd,
 Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
 This shameful lodging.
 Fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.
                                                     Sleeps.
Hail to thee, noble master!
No, my lord.
It is both he and she-
 Your son and daughter.
Yes.
I say yea.
Yes, they have.
By Juno, I swear ay!
My lord, when at their home
 I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
 Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
 My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
 Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
 From Goneril his mistress salutations;
 Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
 Which presently they read; on whose contents,
 They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
 Commanded me to follow and attend
 The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
 And meeting here the other messenger,
 Whose welcome I perceiv'd had poison'd mine-
 Being the very fellow which of late
 Display'd so saucily against your Highness-
 Having more man than wit about me, drew.
 He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.
 Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
 The shame which here it suffers.
With the Earl, sir, here within.
None.
 How chance the King comes with so small a number?
Why, fool?
Where learn'd you this, fool?
Who's there, besides foul weather?
I know you. Where's the King?
But who is with him?
Sir, I do know you,
 And dare upon the warrant of my note
 Commend a dear thing to you. There is division
 (Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
 With mutual cunning) 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;
 Who have (as who have not, that their great stars
 Thron'd and set high?) servants, who seem no less,
 Which are to France the spies and speculations
 Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,
 Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,
 Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
 Against the old kind King, or something deeper,
 Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings-
 But, true it is, from France there comes a power
 Into this scattered kingdom, who already,
 Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
 In some of our best ports and are at point
 To show their open banner. Now to you:
 If on my credit you dare build so far
 To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
 Some that will thank you, making just report
 Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
 The King hath cause to plain.
 I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
 And from some knowledge and assurance offer
 This office to you.
No, do not.
 For confirmation that I am much more
 Than my out-wall, open this purse and take
 What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia
 (As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
 And she will tell you who your fellow is
 That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
 I will go seek the King.
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
 That, when we have found the King (in which your pain
 That way, I'll this), he that first lights on him
 Holla the other.
                                         Exeunt [severally].
Who's there?
Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
 Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
 Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
 And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
 Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
 Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
 Remember to have heard. Man's nature cannot carry
 Th' affliction nor the fear.
Alack, bareheaded?
 Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
 Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
 Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house
 (More harder than the stones whereof 'tis rais'd,
 Which even but now, demanding after you,
 Denied me to come in) return, and force
 Their scanted courtesy.
Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.
 The tyranny of the open night 's too rough
 For nature to endure.
Good my lord, enter here.
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
Good my lord, enter here.
Give me thy hand. Who's there?
What art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw?
 Come forth.
             Enter Edgar [disguised as a madman].
He hath no daughters, sir.
How fares your Grace?
Who's there? What is't you seek?
Good my lord, take his offer; go into th' house.
Importune him once more to go, my lord.
 His wits begin t' unsettle.
This way, my lord.
Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
Sirrah, come on; go along with us.
All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.
 The gods reward your kindness!
                                          Exit [Gloucester].
How do you, sir? Stand you not so amaz'd.
 Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
 That you so oft have boasted to retain?
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
Here, sir; but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
Oppressed nature sleeps.
 This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
 Which, if convenience will not allow,
 Stand in hard cure. [To the Fool] Come, help to bear thy master.
 Thou must not stay behind.
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the
 reason?
Who hath he left behind him general?
Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration of
 grief?
O, then it mov'd her?
Made she no verbal question?
It is the stars,
 The stars above us, govern our conditions;
 Else one self mate and mate could not beget
 Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
Was this before the King return'd?
Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town;
 Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
 What we are come about, and by no means
 Will yield to see his daughter.
A sovereign shame so elbows him; his own unkindness,
 That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
 To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
 To his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
 His mind so venomously that burning shame
 Detains him from Cordelia.
Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear
 And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause
 Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
 When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
 Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you go
 Along with me.                                      Exeunt.
To be acknowledg'd, madam, is o'erpaid.
 All my reports go with the modest truth;
 Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
Pardon, dear madam.
 Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
 My boon I make it that you know me not
 Till time and I think meet.
Kind and dear princess!
In your own kingdom, sir.
Most certain, sir.
As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about; the powers of
 the kingdom approach apace.
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
 Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.        Exit.
I am come
 To bid my king and master aye good night.
 Is he not here?
Alack, why thus?
Is this the promis'd end?
O my good master!
If fortune brag of two she lov'd and hated,
 One of them we behold.
The same-
 Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?
No, my good lord; I am the very man-
That from your first of difference and decay
 Have followed your sad steps.
Nor no man else! All's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
 Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
 And desperately are dead.
Break, heart; I prithee break!
Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass! He hates him
 That would upon the rack of this tough world
 Stretch him out longer.
The wonder is, he hath endur'd so long.
 He but usurp'd his life.
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
 My master calls me; I must not say no.
