Hilloa, loa!
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land! But I am
not to say it is a sea, for it is now the sky; betwixt the
firmament and it you cannot thrust a bodkin's point.
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it
takes up the shore! But that's not to the point. O, the most
piteous cry of the poor souls! Sometimes to see 'em, and not to
see 'em; now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast, and anon
swallowed with yeast and froth, as you'd thrust a cork into a
hogshead. And then for the land service- to see how the bear tore
out his shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help, and said his
name was Antigonus, a nobleman! But to make an end of the ship-
to see how the sea flap-dragon'd it; but first, how the poor
souls roared, and the sea mock'd them; and how the poor gentleman
roared, and the bear mock'd him, both roaring louder than the sea
or weather.
Now, now; I have not wink'd since I saw these sights; the
men are not yet cold under water, nor the bear half din'd on the
gentleman; he's at it now.
I would you had been by the ship-side, to have help'd her;
there your charity would have lack'd footing.
You're a made old man; if the sins of your youth are
forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see if the
bear be gone from the gentleman, and how much he hath eaten. They
are never curst but when they are hungry. If there be any of him
left, I'll bury it.
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' th' ground.
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod yields pound
and odd shilling; fifteen hundred shorn, what comes the wool to?
I cannot do 't without counters. Let me see: what am I to
buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound of sugar, five
pound of currants, rice- what will this sister of mine do with
rice? But my father hath made her mistress of the feast, and she
lays it on. She hath made me four and twenty nosegays for the
shearers- three-man song-men all, and very good ones; but they
are most of them means and bases; but one Puritan amongst them,
and he sings psalms to hornpipes. I must have saffron to colour
the warden pies; mace; dates- none, that's out of my note;
nutmegs, seven; race or two of ginger, but that I may beg; four
pound of prunes, and as many of raisins o' th' sun.
I' th' name of me!
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay on
thee, rather than have these off.
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a great
matter.
What, by a horseman or a footman?
Indeed, he should be a footman, by the garments he has left
with thee; if this be a horseman's coat, it hath seen very hot
service. Lend me thy hand, I'll help thee. Come, lend me thy
hand.                                       [Helping him up]
Alas, poor soul!
How now! Canst stand?
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
What manner of fellow was he that robb'd you?
His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipt out of the
court. They cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no
more but abide.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig! He haunts wakes,
fairs, and bear-baitings.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia; if you had but
look'd big and spit at him, he'd have run.
How do you now?
Shall I bring thee on the way?
Then fare thee well. I must go buy spices for our
sheep-shearing.
Come on, strike up.
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up.                                     [Music]
      Here a dance Of SHEPHERDS and SHEPHERDESSES
He could never come better; he shall come in. I love a
ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set
down, or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably.
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow.
Has he any unbraided wares?
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
You have of these pedlars that have more in them than you'd
think, sister.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take no
money of me; but being enthrall'd as I am, it will also be the
bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
Is there no manners left among maids? Will they wear their
plackets where they should bear their faces? Is there not
milking-time, when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle
off these secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all our
guests? 'Tis well they are whisp'ring. Clammer your tongues, and
not a word more.
Have I not told thee how I was cozen'd by the way, and lost
all my money?
Fear not thou, man; thou shalt lose nothing here.
What hast here? Ballads?
Come on, lay it by; and let's first see moe ballads; we'll
buy the other things anon.
Lay it by too. Another.
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves; my father and
the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll not trouble them. Come,
bring away thy pack after me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both.
Pedlar, let's have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
                                  Exit with DORCAS and MOPSA
See, see; what a man you are now! There is no other way but
to tell the King she's a changeling and none of your flesh and
blood.
Nay- but hear me.
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood
has not offended the King; and so your flesh and blood is not to
be punish'd by him. Show those things you found about her, those
secret things- all but what she has with her. This being done,
let the law go whistle; I warrant you.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have
been to him; and then your blood had been the dearer by I know
how much an ounce.
Pray heartily he be at palace.
We are but plain fellows, sir.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you had not
taken yourself with the manner.
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant; say you have none.
This cannot be but a great courtier.
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical.
A great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking on's teeth.
Think you so, sir?
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear, an't like you,
sir?
He seems to be of great authority. Close with him, give him
gold; and though authority be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft led
by the nose with gold. Show the inside of your purse to the
outside of his hand, and no more ado. Remember- ston'd and flay'd
alive.
In some sort, sir; but though my case be a pitiful one, I
hope I shall not be flay'd out of it.
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the King and show our
strange sights. He must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my
sister; we are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as this
old man does, when the business is performed; and remain, as he
says, your pawn till it be brought you.
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me this
other day, because I was no gentleman born. See you these
clothes? Say you see them not and think me still no gentleman
born. You were best say these robes are not gentlemen born. Give
me the lie, do; and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
So you have; but I was a gentleman born before my father;
for the King's son took me by the hand and call'd me brother; and
then the two kings call'd my father brother; and then the Prince,
my brother, and the Princess, my sister, call'd my father father.
And so we wept; and there was the first gentleman-like tears that
ever we shed.
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so preposterous
estate as we are.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
Give me thy hand. I will swear to the Prince thou art as
honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and franklins
say it: I'll swear it.
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear it in
the behalf of his friend. And I'll swear to the Prince thou art a
tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I
know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
drunk. But I'll swear it; and I would thou wouldst be a tall
fellow of thy hands.
Ay, by any means, prove a tall fellow. If I do not wonder
how thou dar'st venture to be drunk not being a tall fellow,
trust me not. Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, are
going to see the Queen's picture. Come, follow us; we'll be thy
good masters.                                         Exeunt
