Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping; all the
kind of the Launces have this very fault. I have receiv'd my
proportion, like the Prodigious Son, and am going with Sir
Proteus to the Imperial's court. I think Crab my dog be the
sourest-natured dog that lives: my mother weeping, my father
wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat wringing her
hands, and all our house in a great perplexity; yet did not this
cruel-hearted cur shed one tear. He is a stone, a very pebble
stone, and has no more pity in him than a dog. A Jew would have
wept to have seen our parting; why, my grandam having no eyes,
look you, wept herself blind at my parting. Nay, I'll show you
the manner of it. This shoe is my father; no, this left shoe is
my father; no, no, left shoe is my mother; nay, that cannot be so
neither; yes, it is so, it is so, it hath the worser sole. This
shoe with the hole in it is my mother, and this my father. A
vengeance on 't! There 'tis. Now, sir, this staff is my sister,
for, look you, she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand;
this hat is Nan our maid; I am the dog; no, the dog is himself,
and I am the dog- O, the dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so, so.
Now come I to my father: 'Father, your blessing.' Now should not
the shoe speak a word for weeping; now should I kiss my father;
well, he weeps on. Now come I to my mother. O that she could
speak now like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her- why there 'tis;
here's my mother's breath up and down. Now come I to my sister;
mark the moan she makes. Now the dog all this while sheds not a
tear, nor speaks a word; but see how I lay the dust with my
tears.
                        Enter PANTHINO
It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the
unkindest tied that ever any man tied.
Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.
For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.
In thy tale.
Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and the
service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river were dry, I am able
to fill it with my tears; if the wind were down, I could drive
the boat with my sighs.
Sir, call me what thou dar'st.
Well, I will go.                                Exeunt
Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not welcome. I
reckon this always, that a man is never undone till he be hang'd,
nor never welcome to a place till some certain shot be paid, and
the hostess say 'Welcome!'
Marry, after they clos'd in earnest, they parted very
fairly in jest.
No.
No, neither.
No, they are both as whole as a fish.
Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it stands well
with her.
What a block art thou that thou canst not! My staff
understands me.
Ay, and what I do too; look thee, I'll but lean, and my
staff understands me.
Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.
Ask my dog. If he say ay, it will; if he say no, it will;
if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.
Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a
parable.
I never knew him otherwise.
A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.
Why, fool, I meant not thee, I meant thy master.
Why, I tell thee I care not though he burn himself in love.
If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if not, thou art an
Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.
Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to
the ale with a Christian. Wilt thou go?
So-ho, so-ho!
Him we go to find: there's not a hair on 's head but 'tis a
Valentine.
Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
Nothing.
Why, sir, I'll strike nothing. I pray you-
Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.
I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to think
my master is a kind of a knave; but that's all one if he be but
one knave. He lives not now that knows me to be in love; yet I am
in love; but a team of horse shall not pluck that from me; nor
who 'tis I love; and yet 'tis a woman; but what woman I will not
tell myself; and yet 'tis a milkmaid; yet 'tis not a maid, for
she hath had gossips; yet 'tis a maid, for she is her master's
maid and serves for wages. She hath more qualities than a
water-spaniel- which is much in a bare Christian. Here is the
cate-log  [Pulling out a paper]  of her condition. 'Inprimis: She
can fetch and carry.' Why, a horse can do no more; nay, a horse
cannot fetch, but only carry; therefore is she better than a
jade. 'Item: She can milk.' Look you, a sweet virtue in a maid
with clean hands.
                         Enter SPEED
With my master's ship? Why, it is at sea.
The black'st news that ever thou heard'st.
Why, as black as ink.
Fie on thee, jolt-head; thou canst not read.
I will try thee. Tell me this: Who begot thee?
O illiterate loiterer. It was the son of thy grandmother.
This proves that thou canst not read.
 [Handing over the paper]  There; and Saint Nicholas be thy
speed.
Ay, that she can.
And thereof comes the proverb: Blessing of your heart, you
brew good ale.
That's as much as to say 'Can she so?'
What need a man care for a stock with a wench, when she can
knit him a stock.
A special virtue; for then she need not be wash'd and
scour'd.
Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can spin for
her living.
That's as much as to say 'bastard virtues'; that indeed
know not their fathers, and therefore have no names.
Close at the heels of her virtues.
Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast.
Read on.
That makes amends for her sour breath.
It's no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.
O villain, that set this down among her vices! To be slow
in words is a woman's only virtue. I pray thee, out with't; and
place it for her chief virtue.
Out with that too; it was Eve's legacy, and cannot be ta'en
from her.
I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.
Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
If her liquor be good, she shall; if she will not, I will;
for good things should be praised.
Of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down she is slow
of; of her purse she shall not, for that I'll keep shut. Now of
another thing she may, and that cannot I help. Well, proceed.
Stop there; I'll have her; she was mine, and not mine,
twice or thrice in that last article. Rehearse that once more.
More hair than wit. It may be; I'll prove it: the cover of
the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt;
the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the
greater hides the less. What's next?
That's monstrous. O that that were out!
Why, that word makes the faults gracious. Well, I'll have
her; an if it be a match, as nothing is impossible-
Why, then will I tell thee- that thy master stays for thee
at the Northgate.
For thee! ay, who art thou? He hath stay'd for a better man
than thee.
Thou must run to him, for thou hast stay'd so long that
going will scarce serve the turn.
Now will he be swing'd for reading my letter. An unmannerly
slave that will thrust himself into secrets! I'll after, to
rejoice in the boy's correction.                        Exit
When a man's servant shall play the cur with him, look you,
it goes hard- one that I brought up of a puppy; one that I sav'd
from drowning, when three or four of his blind brothers and
sisters went to it. I have taught him, even as one would say
precisely 'Thus I would teach a dog.' I was sent to deliver him
as a present to Mistress Silvia from my master; and I came no
sooner into the dining-chamber, but he steps me to her trencher
and steals her capon's leg. O, 'tis a foul thing when a cur
cannot keep himself in all companies! I would have, as one should
say, one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it
were, a dog at all things. If I had not had more wit than he, to
take a fault upon me that he did, I think verily he had been
hang'd for't; sure as I live, he had suffer'd for't. You shall
judge. He thrusts me himself into the company of three or four
gentleman-like dogs under the Duke's table; he had not been
there, bless the mark, a pissing while but all the chamber smelt
him. 'Out with the dog' says one; 'What cur is that?' says
another; 'Whip him out' says the third; 'Hang him up' says the
Duke. I, having been acquainted with the smell before, knew it
was Crab, and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs.
'Friend,' quoth I 'you mean to whip the dog.' 'Ay, marry do I'
quoth he. 'You do him the more wrong,' quoth I; "twas I did the
thing you wot of.' He makes me no more ado, but whips me out of
the chamber. How many masters would do this for his servant? Nay,
I'll be sworn, I have sat in the stock for puddings he hath
stol'n, otherwise he had been executed; I have stood on the
pillory for geese he hath kill'd, otherwise he had suffer'd
for't. Thou think'st not of this now. Nay, I remember the trick
you serv'd me when I took my leave of Madam Silvia. Did not I bid
thee still mark me and do as I do? When didst thou see me heave
up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman's farthingale?
Didst thou ever see me do such a trick?
           Enter PROTEUS, and JULIA in boy's clothes
Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you currish
thanks is good enough for such a present.
No, indeed, did she not; here have I brought him back
again.
Ay, sir; the other squirrel was stol'n from me by the
hangman's boys in the market-place; and then I offer'd her mine
own, who is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore the gift
the greater.
