Give me leave, Caesar.
Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
Admir'd Octavia. Great Mark Antony
Is now a widower.
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an unslipping knot, take Antony
Octavia to his wife; whose beauty claims
No worse a husband than the best of men;
Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales,
Where now half tales be truths. Her love to both
Would each to other, and all loves to both,
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke;
For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.
Good Enobarbus!
There she appear'd indeed! Or my reporter devis'd well for
her.
O, rare for Antony!
Rare Egyptian!
Royal wench!
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed.
He ploughed her, and she cropp'd.
Let us go.
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Whilst you abide here.
Sir, Mark Antony
Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.
What, are the brothers parted?
'Tis a noble Lepidus.
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.
O, Antony! O thou Arabian bird!
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
Both he loves.
Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.
       Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, and OCTAVIA
[Aside to ENOBARBUS] He has a cloud in's face.
[Aside to ENOBARBUS] Why, Enobarbus,
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring; and he wept
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.
Who, queasy with his insolence
Already, will their good thoughts call from him.
Who does he accuse?
Sir, this should be answer'd.
Welcome, lady.
Caesar, I shall.                                 Exit
Retire. We have engag'd ourselves too far.
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.                             Exeunt
      Alarums. Enter ANTONY, and SCARUS wounded
And strange it is
That nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.
A rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity. But you gods will give us
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touch'd.
