Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch;
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth;
Between two blades, which bears the better temper;
Between two horses, which doth bear him best;
Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgment;
But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.
I love no colours; and, without all colour
Of base insinuating flattery,
I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.
Now, by God's will, thou wrong'st him, Somerset;
His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,
Third son to the third Edward, King of England.
Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?
This blot that they object against your house
Shall be wip'd out in the next Parliament,
Call'd for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester;
And if thou be not then created York,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset and William Pole,
Will I upon thy party wear this rose;
And here I prophesy: this brawl to-day,
Grown to this faction in the Temple Garden,
Shall send between the Red Rose and the White
A thousand souls to death and deadly night.
Roam thither then.
Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.
Methinks his lordship should be humbler;
It fitteth not a prelate so to plead.
State holy or unhallow'd, what of that?
Is not his Grace Protector to the King?
An uproar, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the Bishop's men.
                          [A noise again: 'Stones! Stones!']
            Enter the MAYOR OF LONDON, attended
Yield, my Lord Protector; yield, Winchester;
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
You see what mischief, and what murder too,
Hath been enacted through your enmity;
Then be at peace, except ye thirst for blood.
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
Hath banish'd moody discontented fury,
As by his smoothed brows it doth appear;
Why look you still so stem and tragical?
Sweet King! The Bishop hath a kindly gird.
For shame, my Lord of Winchester, relent;
What, shall a child instruct you what to do?
Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign;
Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
We do exhibit to your Majesty.
Let Richard be restored to his blood;
So shall his father's wrongs be recompens'd.
My Lord of York, I promise you, the King
Prettily, methought, did play the orator.
Tush, that was but his fancy; blame him not;
I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.
Graceless, wilt thou deny thy parentage?
And hark ye, sirs; because she is a maid,
Spare for no fagots, let there be enow.
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,
That so her torture may be shortened.
The greatest miracle that e'er ye wrought:
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
Well, go to; we'll have no bastards live;
Especially since Charles must father it.
A married man! That's most intolerable.
It's sign she hath been liberal and free.
Be patient, York. If we conclude a peace,
It shall be with such strict and severe covenants
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.
    Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BASTARD, REIGNIER, and others
How say'st thou, Charles? Shall our condition
stand?
