  [ Within]  There's wood enough within.
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
Drop on you both! A south-west blow on ye
And blister you all o'er!
I must eat my dinner.
This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother,
Which thou tak'st from me. When thou cam'st first,
Thou strok'st me and made much of me, wouldst give me
Water with berries in't, and teach me how
To name the bigger light, and how the less,
That burn by day and night; and then I lov'd thee,
And show'd thee all the qualities o' th' isle,
The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place and fertile.
Curs'd be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own king; and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o' th' island.
O ho, O ho! Would't had been done.
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopl'd else
This isle with Calibans.
You taught me language, and my profit on't
Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
For learning me your language!
No, pray thee.
[Aside]  I must obey. His art is of such pow'r,
It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
And make a vassal of him.
All the infections that the sun sucks up
From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall, and make him
By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me,
And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
Fright me with urchin-shows, pitch me i' th' mire,
Nor lead me, like a firebrand, in the dark
Out of my way, unless he bid 'em; but
For every trifle are they set upon me;
Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me,
And after bite me; then like hedgehogs which
Lie tumbling in my barefoot way, and mount
Their pricks at my footfall; sometime am I
All wound with adders, who with cloven tongues
Do hiss me into madness.
                     Enter TRINCULO
Lo, now, lo!
Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me
For bringing wood in slowly. I'll fall flat;
Perchance he will not mind me.
Do not torment me. O!
The spirit torments me. O!
Do not torment me, prithee; I'll bring my wood
home faster.
Thou dost me yet but little hurt; thou wilt anon,
I know it by thy trembling; now Prosper works upon thee.
 [Aside]  These be fine things, an if they be not
sprites.
That's a brave god, and bears celestial liquor.
I will kneel to him.
I'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true
subject, for the liquor is not earthly.
Hast thou not dropp'd from heaven?
I have seen thee in her, and I do adore thee. My
mistress show'd me thee, and thy dog and thy bush.
I'll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island;
and will kiss thy foot. I prithee be my god.
I'll kiss thy foot; I'll swear myself thy
subject.
I'll show thee the best springs; I'll pluck thee
berries;
I'll fish for thee, and get thee wood enough.
A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!
I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
Thou wondrous man.
I prithee let me bring thee where crabs grow;
And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts;
Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how
To snare the nimble marmoset; I'll bring thee
To clust'ring filberts, and sometimes I'll get thee
Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?
 [Sings drunkenly]  Farewell, master; farewell,
farewell!
No more dams I'll make for fish;
Nor fetch in firing
At requiring,
Nor scrape trenchering, nor wash dish.
'Ban 'Ban, Ca-Caliban,
Has a new master-Get a new man.
Freedom, high-day! high-day, freedom! freedom, high-
day, freedom!
How does thy honour? Let me lick thy shoe.
I'll not serve him; he is not valiant.
Lo, how he mocks me! Wilt thou let him, my
lord?
Lo, lo again! Bite him to death, I prithee.
I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleas'd to
hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant,
sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me of the
island.
Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou;
I would my valiant master would destroy thee.
I do not lie.
I say, by sorcery he got this isle;
From me he got it. If thy greatness will
Revenge it on him-for I know thou dar'st,
But this thing dare not-
Thou shalt be lord of it, and I'll serve thee.
Yea, yea, my lord; I'll yield him thee asleep,
Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.
What a pied ninny's this! Thou scurvy patch!
I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows,
And take his bottle from him. When that's gone
He shall drink nought but brine; for I'll not show him
Where the quick freshes are.
Ha, ha, ha!
Beat him enough; after a little time, I'll beat
him too.
Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custom with him
I' th' afternoon to sleep; there thou mayst brain him,
Having first seiz'd his books; or with a log
Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
Or cut his wezand with thy knife. Remember
First to possess his books; for without them
He's but a sot, as I am, nor hath not
One spirit to command; they all do hate him
As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.
He has brave utensils-for so he calls them-
Which, when he has a house, he'll deck withal.
And that most deeply to consider is
The beauty of his daughter; he himself
Calls her a nonpareil. I never saw a woman
But only Sycorax my dam and she;
But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
As great'st does least.
Ay, lord; she will become thy bed, I warrant,
And bring thee forth brave brood.
Within this half hour will he be asleep.
Wilt thou destroy him then?
Thou mak'st me merry; I am full of pleasure.
Let us be jocund; will you troll the catch
You taught me but while-ere?
That's not the tune.
                  [ARIEL plays the tune on a tabor and pipe]
Art thou afeard?
Be not afeard. The isle is full of noises,
Sounds, and sweet airs, that give delight, and hurt not.
Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
Will hum about mine ears; and sometimes voices,
That, if I then had wak'd after long sleep,
Will make me sleep again; and then, in dreaming,
The clouds methought would open and show riches
Ready to drop upon me, that, when I wak'd,
I cried to dream again.
When Prospero is destroy'd.
Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not
Hear a foot fall; we now are near his cell.
Good my lord, give me thy favour still.
Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to
Shall hoodwink this mischance; therefore speak softly.
All's hush'd as midnight yet.
Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here,
This is the mouth o' th' cell; no noise, and enter.
Do that good mischief which may make this island
Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban,
For aye thy foot-licker.
Let it alone, thou fool; it is but trash.
The dropsy drown this fool! What do you mean
To dote thus on such luggage? Let 't alone,
And do the murder first. If he awake,
From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches;
Make us strange stuff.
I will have none on't. We shall lose our time,
And all be turn'd to barnacles, or to apes
With foreheads villainous low.
O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!
How fine my master is! I am afraid
He will chastise me.
I shall be pinch'd to death.
Ay, that I will; and I'll be wise hereafter,
And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass
Was I to take this drunkard for a god,
And worship this dull fool!
