Where should this music be? I' th' air or th'
earth?
It sounds no more; and sure it waits upon
Some god o' th' island. Sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the King my father's wreck,
This music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
With its sweet air; thence I have follow'd it,
Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
No, it begins again.
               ARIEL'S SONG
     Full fathom five thy father lies;
       Of his bones are coral made;
     Those are pearls that were his eyes;
       Nothing of him that doth fade
     But doth suffer a sea-change
     Into something rich and strange.
     Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell:
       [Burden: Ding-dong.]
     Hark! now I hear them-Ding-dong bell.
The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.
Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my pray'r
May know if you remain upon this island;
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here. My prime request,
Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!
If you be maid or no?
My language? Heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where 'tis spoken.
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep. Myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The King my father wreck'd.
Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.
O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The Queen of Naples.
No, as I am a man.
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.
                      [He draws, and is charmed from moving]
So they are;
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats
To whom I am subdu'd, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid. All corners else o' th' earth
Let liberty make use of; space enough
Have I in such a prison.
There be some sports are painful, and their
labour
Delight in them sets off; some kinds of baseness
Are nobly undergone, and most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task
Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead,
And makes my labours pleasures. O, she is
Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed;
And he's compos'd of harshness. I must remove
Some thousands of these logs, and pile them up,
Upon a sore injunction; my sweet mistress
Weeps when she sees me work, and says such baseness
Had never like executor. I forget;
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,
Most busy, least when I do it.
    Enter MIRANDA; and PROSPERO at a distance, unseen
O most dear mistress,
The sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.
No, precious creature;
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
Than you should such dishonour undergo,
While I sit lazy by.
No, noble mistress; 'tis fresh morning with me
When you are by at night. I do beseech you,
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers,
What is your name?
Admir'd Miranda!
What's dearest to the world! Full many a lady
I have ey'd with best regard; and many a time
Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear; for several virtues
Have I lik'd several women, never any
With so full soul, but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd,
And put it to the foil; but you, O you,
So perfect and so peerless, are created
Of every creature's best!
I am, in my condition,
A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king-
I would not so!-and would no more endure
This wooden slavery than to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:
The very instant that I saw you, did
My heart fly to your service; there resides
To make me slave to it; and for your sake
Am I this patient log-man.
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound,
And crown what I profess with kind event,
If I speak true! If hollowly, invert
What best is boded me to mischief! I,
Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world,
Do love, prize, honour you.
Wherefore weep you?
My mistress, dearest;
And I thus humble ever.
Ay, with a heart as willing
As bondage e'er of freedom. Here's my hand.
A thousand thousand!
                      Exeunt FERDINAND and MIRANDA severally
I do believe it
Against an oracle.
As I hope
For quiet days, fair issue, and long life,
With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den,
The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion
Our worser genius can, shall never melt
Mine honour into lust, to take away
The edge of that day's celebration,
When I shall think or Phoebus' steeds are founder'd
Or Night kept chain'd below.
I warrant you, sir,
The white cold virgin snow upon my heart
Abates the ardour of my liver.
This is a most majestic vision, and
Harmonious charmingly. May I be bold
To think these spirits?
Let me live here ever;
So rare a wond'red father and a wise
Makes this place Paradise.
       [JUNO and CERES whisper, and send IRIS on employment]
This is strange; your father's in some passion
That works him strongly.
No, my dearest love,
I would not for the world.
Though the seas threaten, they are merciful;
I have curs'd them without cause.                   [Kneels]
Sir, she is mortal;
But by immortal Providence she's mine.
I chose her when I could not ask my father
For his advice, nor thought I had one. She
Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,
Of whom so often I have heard renown
But never saw before; of whom I have
Receiv'd a second life; and second father
This lady makes him to me.
