Bring in the banquet quickly; wine enough
Cleopatra's health to drink.
Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall be-
drunk to bed.
Hush! Here comes Antony.
No, lady.
Madam?
What's your pleasure, sir?
Why, then we kill all our women. We see how mortal an
unkindness is to them; if they suffer our departure, death's the
word.
Under a compelling occasion, let women die. It were pity
to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great
cause they should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching but
the least noise of this, dies instantly; I have seen her die
twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do think there is mettle
in death, which commits some loving act upon her, she hath such a
celerity in dying.
Alack, sir, no! Her passions are made of nothing but the
finest part of pure love. We cannot call her winds and waters
sighs and tears; they are greater storms and tempests than
almanacs can report. This cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she
makes a show'r of rain as well as Jove.
O Sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of
work, which not to have been blest withal would have discredited
your travel.
Sir?
Fulvia?
Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When it
pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it
shows to man the tailors of the earth; comforting therein that
when old robes are worn out there are members to make new. If
there were no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut,
and the case to be lamented. This grief is crown'd with
consolation: your old smock brings forth a new petticoat; and
indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.
And the business you have broach'd here cannot be
without you; especially that of Cleopatra's, which wholly depends
on your abode.
I shall do't.                                Exeunt
I shall entreat him
To answer like himself. If Caesar move him,
Let Antony look over Caesar's head
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard,
I would not shave't to-day.
Every time
Serves for the matter that is then born in't.
Not if the small come first.
And yonder, Caesar.
        Enter CAESAR, MAECENAS, and AGRIPPA
Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to
wars with the women!
Or, if you borrow one another's love for the instant,
you may, when you hear no more words of Pompey, return it again.
You shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to
do.
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.
Go to, then- your considerate stone!
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Maecenas! My honourable
friend, Agrippa!
Ay, sir; we did sleep day out of countenance and made
the night light with drinking.
This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had much more
monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
When she first met Mark Antony she purs'd up his heart,
upon the river of Cydnus.
I will tell you.
The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
Burn'd on the water. The poop was beaten gold;
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were love-sick with them; the oars were silver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggar'd all description. She did lie
In her pavilion, cloth-of-gold, of tissue,
O'erpicturing that Venus where we see
The fancy out-work nature. On each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-colour'd fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the helm
A seeming mermaid steers. The silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her; and Antony,
Enthron'd i' th' market-place, did sit alone,
Whistling to th' air; which, but for vacancy,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in nature.
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Invited her to supper. She replied
It should be better he became her guest;
Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,
Whom ne'er the word of 'No' woman heard speak,
Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
And for his ordinary pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only.
I saw her once
Hop forty paces through the public street;
And, having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
That she did make defect perfection,
And, breathless, pow'r breathe forth.
Never! He will not.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry
Where most she satisfies; for vilest things
Become themselves in her, that the holy priests
Bless her when she is riggish.
Humbly, sir, I thank you.                    Exeunt
No more of that! He did so.
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.
Well;
And well am like to do, for I perceive
Four feasts are toward.
Sir,
I never lov'd you much; but I ha' prais'd ye
When you have well deserv'd ten times as much
As I have said you did.
At sea, I think.
You have done well by water.
I Will praise any man that will praise me; though it
cannot be denied what I have done by land.
Yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you
have been a great thief by sea.
There I deny my land service. But give me your hand,
Menas; if our eyes had authority, here they might take two
thieves kissing.
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
We came hither to fight with you.
If he do, sure he cannot weep't back again.
Caesar' sister is call'd Octavia.
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.
'Tis true.
If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would not
prophesy so.
I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems
to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of
their amity: Octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.
Not he that himself is not so; which is Mark Antony. He
will to his Egyptian dish again; then shall the sighs of Octavia
blow the fire up in Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is
the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of
their variance. Antony will use his affection where it is; he
married but his occasion here.
I shall take it, sir. We have us'd our throats in Egypt.
Not till you have slept. I fear me you'll be in till
then.
Here's to thee, Menas!
There's a strong fellow, Menas.
           [Pointing to the servant who carries off LEPIDUS]
'A bears the third part of the world, man; see'st not?
Drink thou; increase the reels.
[To ANTONY] Ha, my brave emperor!
Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals
And celebrate our drink?
All take hands.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
The while I'll place you; then the boy shall sing;
The holding every man shall bear as loud
As his strong sides can volley.
           [Music plays. ENOBARBUS places them hand in hand]
                    THE SONG
        Come, thou monarch of the vine,
        Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
        In thy fats our cares be drown'd,
        With thy grapes our hairs be crown'd.
        Cup us till the world go round,
        Cup us till the world go round!
Take heed you fall not.
                          Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS and MENAS
Menas, I'll not on shore.
Hoo! says 'a. There's my cap.
They have dispatch'd with Pompey; he is gone;
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
To part from Rome; Caesar is sad; and Lepidus,
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the green sickness.
A very fine one. O, how he loves Caesar!
Caesar? Why he's the Jupiter of men.
Spake you of Caesar? How! the nonpareil!
Would you praise Caesar, say 'Caesar'- go no further.
But he loves Caesar best. Yet he loves Antony.
Hoo! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot
Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number- hoo!-
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
They are his shards, and he their beetle. [Trumpets
  within] So-
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.
[Aside to AGRIPPA] Will Caesar weep?
[Aside to AGRIPPA] He were the worse for that, were he a
  horse;
So is he, being a man.
[Aside to AGRIPPA] That year, indeed, he was troubled
  with a rheum;
What willingly he did confound he wail'd,
Believe't- till I weep too.
How now, friend Eros!
What, man?
This is old. What is the success?
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps- no more;
And throw between them all the food thou hast,
They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?
Our great navy's rigg'd.
'Twill be naught;
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.
But why, why,
Well, is it, is it?
[Aside] Well, I could reply:
If we should serve with horse and mares together
The horse were merely lost; the mares would bear
A soldier and his horse.
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony;
Take from his heart, take from his brain, from's time,
What should not then be spar'd. He is already
Traduc'd for levity; and 'tis said in Rome
That Photinus an eunuch and your maids
Manage this war.
Nay, I have done.
Here comes the Emperor.
So hath my lord dar'd him to single fight.
Your ships are not well mann'd;
Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people
Ingross'd by swift impress. In Caesar's fleet
Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought;
Their ships are yare; yours heavy. No disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
Being prepar'd for land.
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
The absolute soldiership you have by land;
Distract your army, which doth most consist
Of war-mark'd footmen; leave unexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge; quite forgo
The way which promises assurance; and
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard
From firm security.
Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.
Th' Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.
To see't mine eyes are blasted.
                    Enter SCARUS
What's thy passion?
How appears the fight?
That I beheld;
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not
Endure a further view.
Alack, alack!
                   Enter CANIDIUS
Ay, are you thereabouts?
Why then, good night indeed.
I'll yet follow
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.                          Exeunt
                     SCENE XI.
          Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace
           Enter ANTONY With attendants
Think, and die.
Antony only, that would make his will
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his affection should not then
Have nick'd his captainship, at such a point,
When half to half the world oppos'd, he being
The mered question. 'Twas a shame no less
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags
And leave his navy gazing.
[Aside] Mine honesty and I begin to square.
The loyalty well held to fools does make
Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
Does conquer him that did his master conquer,
And earns a place i' th' story.
                   Enter THYREUS
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know
Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar's.
[Aside] To be sure of that,
I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.                                  Exit
[Aside] You will be whipt.
'Tis better playing with a lion's whelp
Than with an old one dying.
Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
A diminution in our captain's brain
Restores his heart. When valour preys on reason,
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Some way to leave him.                                  Exit
                  ACT IV. SCENE I.
          CAESAR'S camp before Alexandria
  Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MAECENAS, with his army;
             CAESAR reading a letter
No.
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.
I'll strike, and cry 'Take all.'
[Aside to CLEOPATRA] 'Tis one of those odd tricks which
  sorrow shoots
Out of the mind.
What mean you, sir,
To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep;
And I, an ass, am onion-ey'd. For shame!
Transform us not to women.
Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on
Affairs of Antony; there did dissuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar
And leave his master Antony. For this pains
Casaer hath hang'd him. Canidius and the rest
That fell away have entertainment, but
No honourable trust. I have done ill,
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely
That I will joy no more.
              Enter a SOLDIER of CAESAR'S
I give it you.
I am alone the villain of the earth,
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart.
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
Shall outstrike thought; but thought will do't, I feel.
I fight against thee? No! I will go seek
Some ditch wherein to die; the foul'st best fits
My latter part of life.                                 Exit
                      SCENE VII.
         Field of battle between the camps
     Alarum. Drums and trumpets. Enter AGRIPPA
                    and others
O, bear me witness, night-
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent!
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder,
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular,
But let the world rank me in register
A master-leaver and a fugitive!
O Antony! O Antony!                                   [Dies]
