Here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any
weather at all, and another storm brewing; I hear it
sing i' th' wind. Yond same black cloud, yond huge one,
looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor. If
it should thunder as it did before, I know not where to
hide my head. Yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by
pailfuls. What have we here? a man or a fish? dead or
alive? A fish: he smells like a fish; a very ancient and
fish-like smell; kind of not-of-the-newest Poor-John. A
strange fish! Were I in England now, as once I was, and
had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but
would give a piece of silver. There would this monster
make a man; any strange beast there makes a man; when
they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar, they
will lay out ten to see a dead Indian. Legg'd like a
man, and his fins like arms! Warm, o' my troth! I do now
let loose my opinion; hold it no longer: this is no
fish, but an islander, that hath lately suffered by
thunderbolt.  [Thunder]  Alas, the storm is come again! My
best way is to creep under his gaberdine; there is no
other shelter hereabout. Misery acquaints a man with
strange bed-fellows. I will here shroud till the dregs
of the storm be past.
        Enter STEPHANO singing; a bottle in his hand
I should know that voice; it should be-but he is
drown'd; and these are devils. O, defend me!
Stephano!
Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me, and
speak to me; for I am Trinculo-be not afeard-thy good
friend Trinculo.
I took him to be kill'd with a thunderstroke.
But art thou not drown'd, Stephano? I hope now thou are
not drown'd. Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the
dead moon-calf's gaberdine for fear of the storm. And
art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans
scap'd!
Swum ashore, man, like a duck; I can swim like
a duck, I'll be sworn.
O Stephano, hast any more of this?
By this good light, this is a very shallow
monster!
I afeard of him! A very weak monster! The Man i' th'
Moon! A most poor credulous monster! Well drawn,
monster, in good sooth!
By this light, a most perfidious and drunken
monster! When's god's asleep he'll rob his bottle.
I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-
headed monster. A most scurvy monster! I could find in
my heart to beat him-
But that the poor monster's in drink. An
abominable monster!
A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of
a poor drunkard!
A howling monster; a drunken monster!
Servant-monster! The folly of this island! They
say there's but five upon this isle: we are three of
them; if th' other two be brain'd like us, the state
totters.
Where should they be set else? He were a brave
monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
Your lieutenant, if you list; he's no standard.
Nor go neither; but you'll lie like dogs, and
yet say nothing neither.
Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I am in case
to justle a constable. Why, thou debosh'd fish, thou,
was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack
as I to-day? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but
half fish and half a monster?
'Lord' quoth he! That a monster should be such
a natural!
Why, I said nothing.
Why, what did I? I did nothing. I'll go farther
off.
I did not give the lie. Out o' your wits and
hearing too? A pox o' your bottle! This can sack and
drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the devil
take your fingers!
Excellent.
This is the tune of our catch, play'd by the
picture of Nobody.
O, forgive me my sins!
The sound is going away; let's follow it, and
after do our work.
Wilt come? I'll follow, Stephano.             Exeunt
Monster, I do smell all horse-piss at which my
nose is in great indignation.
Thou wert but a lost monster.
Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool!
That's more to me than my wetting; yet this is
your harmless fairy, monster.
O King Stephano! O peer! O worthy Stephano!
Look what a wardrobe here is for thee!
O, ho, monster; we know what belongs to a
frippery. O King Stephano!
Thy Grace shall have it.
Do, do. We steal by line and level, an't like
your Grace.
Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers,
and away with the rest.
And this.
If these be true spies which I wear in my head,
here's a goodly sight.
I have been in such a pickle since I saw you
last that, I fear me, will never out of my bones. I
shall not fear fly-blowing.
