Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart
a thing to you from his Majesty.
I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot
tell how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that
he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
what part a gentleman would see.
Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
Sir?
tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
Of Laertes?
I know you are not ignorant-
You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-
I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
Rapier and dagger.
The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
very liberal conceit.
The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath
laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Shall I redeliver you e'en so?
I commend my duty to your lordship.
Ay, my good lord.
A hit, a very palpable hit.
Nothing neither way.
Look to the Queen there, ho!
How is't, Laertes?
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To the ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.
