I'll pheeze you, in faith.
Y'are a baggage; the Slys are no rogues. Look in the
chronicles: we came in with Richard Conqueror. Therefore, paucas
pallabris; let the world slide. Sessa!
No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy, go to thy cold bed
and warm thee.
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him by law.
I'll not budge an inch, boy; let him come, and kindly.
                                              [Falls asleep]
   Wind horns. Enter a LORD from hunting, with his train
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.
I am Christophero Sly; call not me 'honour' nor 'lordship.' I
ne'er drank sack in my life; and if you give me any conserves,
give me conserves of beef. Ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear,
for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than
legs, nor no more shoes than feet- nay, sometime more feet than
shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the overleather.
What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly, old
Sly's son of Burton Heath; by birth a pedlar, by education a
cardmaker, by transmutation a bear-herd, and now by present
profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of
Wincot, if she know me not; if she say I am not fourteen pence on
the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying'st knave in
Christendom. What! I am not bestraught.  [Taking a pot of ale]
Here's-
Am I a lord and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? Or have I dream'd till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savours, and I feel soft things.
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed,
And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
And once again, a pot o' th' smallest ale.
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?
Ay, the woman's maid of the house.
Now, Lord be thanked for my good amends!
I thank thee; thou shalt not lose by it.
Marry, I fare well; for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?
Are you my wife, and will not call me husband?
My men should call me 'lord'; I am your goodman.
I know it well. What must I call her?
Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?
Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
And slept above some fifteen year or more.
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
                                             Exeunt SERVANTS
Madam, undress you, and come now to bed.
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long. But I would
be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in
despite of the flesh and the blood.
                   Enter a MESSENGER
Marry, I will; let them play it. Is not a comonty a
Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
What, household stuff?
Well, we'll see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let
the world slip;-we shall ne'er be younger.
                                             [They sit down]
      A flourish of trumpets announces the play
Yes, by Saint Anne do I. A good matter, surely; comes there
any more of it?
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady
Would 'twere done!                        [They sit and mark]
