England ne'er had a king until his time.
Virtue he had, deserving to command;
His brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams;
His arms spread wider than a dragon's wings;
His sparkling eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his enemies
Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? His deeds exceed all speech:
He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.
The Church! Where is it? Had not churchmen
pray'd,
His thread of life had not so soon decay'd.
None do you like but an effeminate prince,
Whom like a school-boy you may overawe.
Name not religion, for thou lov'st the flesh;
And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st,
Except it be to pray against thy foes.
Is Paris lost? Is Rouen yielded up?
If Henry were recall'd to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.
We will not fly but to our enemies' throats.
Bedford, if thou be slack I'll fight it out.
I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can
To view th' artillery and munition;
And then I will proclaim young Henry king.              Exit
I am come to survey the Tower this day;
Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance.
Where be these warders that they wait not here?
Open the gates; 'tis Gloucester that calls.
Who willed you, or whose will stands but
mine?
There's none Protector of the realm but I.
Break up the gates, I'll be your warrantize.
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
              [GLOUCESTER'S men rush at the Tower gates, and
                     WOODVILLE the Lieutenant speaks within]
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the gates; here's Gloucester that would enter.
Faint-hearted Woodville, prizest him fore me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate
Whom Henry, our late sovereign, ne'er could brook!
Thou art no friend to God or to the King.
Open the gates, or I'll shut thee out shortly.
Or we'll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.
   Enter to the PROTECTOR at the Tower gates WINCHESTER
               and his men in tawny coats
Peel'd priest, dost thou command me to be
shut out?
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,
Thou that contrived'st to murder our dead lord;
Thou that giv'st whores indulgences to sin.
I'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal's hat,
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.
I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back.
Thy scarlet robes as a child's bearing-cloth
I'll use to carry thee out of this place.
What! am I dar'd and bearded to my face?
Draw, men, for all this privileged place
Blue-coats to tawny-coats. Priest, beware your beard;
I mean to tug it, and to cuff you soundly;
Under my feet I stamp thy cardinal's hat;
In spite of Pope or dignities of church,
Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.
Winchester goose! I cry 'A rope, a rope!'
Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay?
Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.
Out, tawny-coats! Out, scarlet hypocrite!
     Here GLOUCESTER'S men beat out the CARDINAL'S
    men; and enter in the hurly burly the MAYOR OF
              LONDON and his OFFICERS
Peace, Mayor! thou know'st little of my wrongs:
Here's Beaufort, that regards nor God nor King,
Hath here distrain'd the Tower to his use.
I Will not answer thee with words, but blows.
                                  [Here they skirmish again]
Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law;
But we shall meet and break our minds at large.
Mayor, farewell; thou dost but what thou
mayst.
Presumptuous priest, this place commands my
patience,
Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me.
Think not, although in writing I preferr'd
The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,
That therefore I have forg'd, or am not able
Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen.
No, prelate; such is thy audacious wickedness,
Thy lewd, pestiferous, and dissentious pranks,
As very infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious usurer;
Froward by nature, enemy to peace;
Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems
A man of thy profession and degree;
And for thy treachery, what's more manifest
In that thou laid'st a trap to take my life,
As well at London Bridge as at the Tower?
Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,
The King, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.
As good!
Thou bastard of my grandfather!
Am I not Protector, saucy priest?
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps,
And useth it to patronage his theft.
Thou art reverend
Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.
You of my household, leave this peevish broil,
And set this unaccustom'd fight aside.
man
Just and upright, and for your royal birth
Inferior to none but to his Majesty;
And ere that we will suffer such a prince,
So kind a father of the commonweal,
To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,
We and our wives and children all will fight
And have our bodies slaught'red by thy foes.
Shall pitch a field when we are dead.          [Begin again]
Stay, stay, I say!
And if you love me, as you say you do,
Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.
Compassion on the King commands me stoop,
Or I would see his heart out ere the priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.
Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
Well urg'd, my Lord of Warwick; for, sweet
prince,
An if your Grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to do Richard right;
Especially for those occasions
At Eltham Place I told your Majesty.
Now will it best avail your Majesty
To cross the seas and to be crown'd in France:
The presence of a king engenders love
Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
As it disanimates his enemies.
Your ships already are in readiness.
                     Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but EXETER
Yes, if it please your Majesty, my liege.
Lord Bishop, set the crown upon his head.
Now, Governor of Paris, take your oath
                                           [GOVERNOR kneels]
That you elect no other king but him,
Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
And none your foes but such as shall pretend
Malicious practices against his state.
This shall ye do, so help you righteous God!
                               Exeunt GOVERNOR and his train
                Enter SIR JOHN FASTOLFE
To say the truth, this fact was infamous
And ill beseeming any common man,
Much more a knight, a captain, and a leader.
 [Viewing the superscription]  What means his
Grace, that he hath chang'd his style?
No more but plain and bluntly 'To the King!'
Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?
Or doth this churlish superscription
Pretend some alteration in good-will?
What's here?  [Reads]  'I have, upon especial cause,
Mov'd with compassion of my country's wreck,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious faction,
And join'd with Charles, the rightful King of France.'
O monstrous treachery! Can this be so
That in alliance, amity, and oaths,
There should be found such false dissembling guile?
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.
It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.
Confirm it so? Confounded be your strife;
And perish ye, with your audacious prate!
Presumptuous vassals, are you not asham'd
With this immodest clamorous outrage
To trouble and disturb the King and us?
And you, my lords- methinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse objections,
Much less to take occasion from their mouths
To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves.
Let me persuade you take a better course.
I have, my lord; and their intent is this:
They humbly sue unto your Excellence
To have a godly peace concluded of
Between the realms of England and of France.
Well, my good lord, and as the only means
To stop effusion of our Christian blood
And stablish quietness on every side.
Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
A man of great authority in France,
Proffers his only daughter to your Grace
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.
And for the proffer of my lord your master,
I have inform'd his Highness so at large,
As, liking of the lady's virtuous gifts,
Her beauty, and the value of her dower,
He doth intend she shall be England's Queen.
So should I give consent to flatter sin.
You know, my lord, your Highness is betroth'd
Unto another lady of esteem.
How shall we then dispense with that contract,
And not deface your honour with reproach?
Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than
that?
Her father is no better than an earl,
Although in glorious titles he excel.
And so the Earl of Armagnac may do,
Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.
Ay, grief, I fear me, both at first and last.
                                Exeunt GLOUCESTER and EXETER
