Was never Scythia half so barbarous!
Demetrius, thou dost over-ween in all;
And so in this, to bear me down with braves.
'Tis not the difference of a year or two
Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate:
I am as able and as fit as thou
To serve and to deserve my mistress' grace;
And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
And plead my passions for Lavinia's love.
Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have,
Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.
For that I am prepar'd and full resolv'd,
Foul-spoken coward, that thund'rest with thy tongue,
And with thy weapon nothing dar'st perform.
I care not, I, knew she and all the world:
I love Lavinia more than all the world.
Aaron, a thousand deaths
Would I propose to achieve her whom I love.
Ay, so the turn were served.
Faith, not me.
Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice.
And this for me, struck home to show my strength.
                                                [Also stabs]
An if she do, I would I were an eunuch.
Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.
I warrant you, madam, we will make that sure.
Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy
That nice-preserved honesty of yours.
What, wouldst thou have me prove myself a bastard?
Nay, then I'll stop your mouth. Bring thou her husband.
This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him.
             DEMETRIUS throws the body
       of BASSIANUS into the pit; then exeunt
     DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, dragging off LAVINIA
Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so,
An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.
Go home, call for sweet water, wash thy hands.
An 'twere my cause, I should go hang myself.
Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius;
He hath some message to deliver us.
O, 'tis a verse in Horace, I know it well;
I read it in the grammar long ago.
A charitable wish and full of love.
And that would she for twenty thousand more.
Belike, for joy the Emperor hath a son.
Thou hast undone our mother.
It shall not live.
Rome will despise her for this foul escape.
I blush to think upon this ignomy.
Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air
With secrets.
Show me a villain that hath done a rape,
And I am sent to be reveng'd on him.
Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd?
Villains, forbear! we are the Empress' sons.
