Let me hire him too. Here's my coxcomb.
                                      [Offers Kent his cap.]
Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
Why? For taking one's part that's out of favour. Nay, an thou
 canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly.
 There, take my coxcomb! Why, this fellow hath banish'd two on's
 daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. If
 thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb.- How now,
 nuncle? Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.
 There's mine! beg another of thy daughters.
Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipp'd out, when
 Lady the brach may stand by th' fire and stink.
Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
Mark it, nuncle.
      Have more than thou showest,
      Speak less than thou knowest,
      Lend less than thou owest,
      Ride more than thou goest,
      Learn more than thou trowest,
      Set less than thou throwest;
      Leave thy drink and thy whore,
      And keep in-a-door,
      And thou shalt have more
      Than two tens to a score.
Then 'tis like the breath of an unfeed lawyer- you gave me
 nothing for't. Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
[to Kent] Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land
 comes to. He will not believe a fool.
Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
 fool and a sweet fool?
  That lord that counsell'd thee
        To give away thy land,
      Come place him here by me-
        Do thou for him stand.
      The sweet and bitter fool
        Will presently appear;
      The one in motley here,
        The other found out there.
All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast
 born with.
No, faith; lords and great men will not let me. If I had a
 monopoly out, they would have part on't. And ladies too, they
 will not let me have all the fool to myself; they'll be
 snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give thee two
 crowns.
Why, after I have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the
 meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i'
 th' middle and gav'st away both parts, thou bor'st thine ass on
 thy back o'er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
 when thou gav'st thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in
 this, let him be whipp'd that first finds it so.
 [Sings]    Fools had ne'er less grace in a year,
              For wise men are grown foppish;
            They know not how their wits to wear,
              Their manners are so apish.
I have us'd it, nuncle, ever since thou mad'st thy daughters
 thy mother; for when thou gav'st them the rod, and put'st down
 thine own breeches,
 [Sings]    Then they for sudden joy did weep,
              And I for sorrow sung,
            That such a king should play bo-peep
              And go the fools among.
 Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
 lie. I would fain learn to lie.
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. They'll have me
 whipp'd for speaking true; thou'lt have me whipp'd for lying;
 and sometimes I am whipp'd for holding my peace. I had rather be
 any kind o' thing than a fool! And yet I would not be thee,
 nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing
 i' th' middle. Here comes one o' the parings.
                        Enter Goneril.
Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for
 her frowning. Now thou art an O without a figure. I am better
 than thou art now: I am a fool, thou art nothing.
 [To Goneril] Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face
 bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum!
        He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
        Weary of all, shall want some.-
 [Points at Lear] That's a sheal'd peascod.
For you know, nuncle,
      The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
      That it had it head bit off by it young.
 So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?
 Whoop, Jug, I love thee!
Lear's shadow.
Which they will make an obedient father.
Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry! Take the fool with thee.
      A fox when one has caught her,
      And such a daughter,
      Should sure to the slaughter,
      If my cap would buy a halter.
      So the fool follows after.                       Exit.
If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger of
 kibes?
Then I prithee be merry. Thy wit shall ne'er go slip-shod.
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly; for though
 she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet I can tell
 what I can tell.
She'll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou
 canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on's face?
Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a
 man cannot smell out, 'a may spy into.
Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
Why, to put's head in; not to give it away to his daughters,
 and leave his horns without a case.
Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the seven stars
 are no moe than seven is a pretty reason.
Yes indeed. Thou wouldst make a good fool.
If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten for being
 old before thy time.
Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.
She that's a maid now, and laughs at my departure,
 Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter
                                                     Exeunt.
Ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the
 head, dogs and bears by th' neck, monkeys by th' loins, and men
 by th' legs. When a man's over-lusty at legs, then he wears
 wooden nether-stocks.
Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.
      Fathers that wear rags
        Do make their children blind;
      But fathers that bear bags
        Shall see their children kind.
      Fortune, that arrant whore,
      Ne'er turns the key to th' poor.
 But for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
 daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
An thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question,
 thou'dst well deserv'd it.
We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there's no
 labouring i' th' winter. All that follow their noses are led by
 their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty
 but can smell him that's stinking. Let go thy hold when a great
 wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following
 it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.
 When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I
 would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
      That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
        And follows but for form,
      Will pack when it begins to rain
        And leave thee in the storm.
      But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
        And let the wise man fly.
      The knave turns fool that runs away;
        The fool no knave, perdy.
Not i' th' stocks, fool.
                  Enter Lear and Gloucester
Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she
 put 'em i' th' paste alive. She knapp'd 'em o' th' coxcombs with
 a stick and cried 'Down, wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that,
 in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.
         Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.
O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this
 rain water out o' door. Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters
 blessing! Here's a night pities nether wise men nor fools.
He that has a house to put 's head in has a good head-piece.
      The codpiece that will house
        Before the head has any,
      The head and he shall louse:
        So beggars marry many.
      The man that makes his toe
        What he his heart should make
      Shall of a corn cry woe,
        And turn his sleep to wake.
 For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a
 glass.
                         Enter Kent.
Marry, here's grace and a codpiece; that's a wise man and a
 fool.
[sings]
      He that has and a little tiny wit-
        With hey, ho, the wind and the rain-
      Must make content with his fortunes fit,
         For the rain it raineth every day.
This is a brave night to cool a courtesan. I'll speak a
 prophecy ere I go:
      When priests are more in word than matter;
      When brewers mar their malt with water;
      When nobles are their tailors' tutors,
      No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;
      When every case in law is right,
      No squire in debt nor no poor knight;
      When slanders do not live in tongues,
      Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
      When usurers tell their gold i' th' field,
      And bawds and whores do churches build:
      Then shall the realm of Albion
      Come to great confusion.
      Then comes the time, who lives to see't,
      That going shall be us'd with feet.
 This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.
Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit. Help me, help me!
A spirit, a spirit! He says his name's poor Tom.
Nay, he reserv'd a blanket, else we had been all sham'd.
This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
Prithee, nuncle, be contented! 'Tis a naughty night to swim
 in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's
 heart- a small spark, all the rest on's body cold. Look, here
 comes a walking fire.
                Enter Gloucester with a torch.
Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a
 yeoman.
No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son; for he's a
 mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.
He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's
 health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
     Her boat hath a leak,
         And she must not speak
       Why she dares not come over to thee.
Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
And I'll go to bed at noon.
                      Enter Gloucester.
