Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you, go
and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert-a box, a green-a
box. Do intend vat I speak? A green-a box.
Fe, fe, fe fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je m'en vais a
la cour-la grande affaire.
Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vere
is dat knave, Rugby?
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby.
Come, take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the
court.
O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villainy! larron!
[Pulling SIMPLE out]  Rugby, my rapier!
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
What shall de honest man do in my closet? Dere is
no honest man dat shall come in my closet.
Vell?
Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baillez me some paper.
Tarry you a little-a-while.                        [Writes]
You jack'nape; give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by gar,
it is a shallenge; I will cut his troat in de park; and I will
teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make. You
may be gone; it is not good you tarry here. By gar, I will
cut all his two stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone
to throw at his dog.                             Exit SIMPLE
It is no matter-a ver dat. Do not you tell-a me dat I
shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I vill kill de Jack
priest; and I have appointed mine host of de Jarteer to
measure our weapon. By gar, I will myself have Anne
Page.
Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door.
Follow my heels, Rugby.               Exeunt CAIUS and RUGBY
Jack Rugby!
Vat is de clock, Jack?
By gar, he has save his soul dat he is no come; he has
pray his Pible well dat he is no come; by gar, Jack Rugby,
he is dead already, if he be come.
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him. Take
your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Villainy, take your rapier.
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de world; he is
not show his face.
I pray you, bear witness that me have stay six or
seven, two tree hours for him, and he is no come.
Mock-vater! Vat is dat?
By gar, then I have as much mockvater as de Englishman.
Scurvy jack-dog priest! By gar, me vill cut his ears.
Clapper-de-claw! Vat is dat?
By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me; for,
by gar, me vill have it.
Me tank you for dat.
By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for a jack-
an-ape to Anne Page.
By gar, me dank you vor dat; by gar, I love you; and
I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl, de knight, de
lords, de gentlemen, my patients.
By gar, 'tis good; vell said.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.                    Exeunt
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.
Verefore will you not meet-a me?
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.
Diable! Jack Rugby-mine Host de Jarteer-have I
not stay for him to kill him? Have I not, at de place I did
appoint?
Ay, dat is very good! excellent!
Ha, do I perceive dat? Have you make-a de sot of us,
ha, ha?
By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring me
where is Anne Page; by gar, he deceive me too.
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me; my nursh-a
Quickly tell me so mush.
Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.            Exit RUGBY
By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France; it is not jealous
in France.
Be gar, nor I too; there is no bodies.
By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman.
If there be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
Dat is good; by gar, with all my heart.
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?
I cannot tell vat is dat; but it is tell-a me dat you
make grand preparation for a Duke de Jamany. By my
trot, dere is no duke that the court is know to come; I
tell you for good will. Adieu.                          Exit
I know vat I have to do; adieu.
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened; I ha'
married un garcon, a boy; un paysan, by gar, a boy; it is
not Anne Page; by gar, I am cozened.
Ay, be gar, and 'tis a boy; be gar, I'll raise all
Windsor.                                          Exit CAIUS
