If the great gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
The thing we sue for.
I shall do well.
The people love me, and the sea is mine;
My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to th' full. Mark Antony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flatter'd; but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him.
Where have you this? 'Tis false.
He dreams. I know they are in Rome together,
Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wan'd lip!
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both;
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts,
Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour
Even till a Lethe'd dullness-
                   Enter VARRIUS
How now, Varrius!
I could have given less matter
A better ear. Menas, I did not think
This amorous surfeiter would have donn'd his helm
For such a petty war; his soldiership
Is twice the other twain. But let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
The ne'er-lust-wearied Antony.
I know not, Menas,
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
Were't not that we stand up against them all,
'Twere pregnant they should square between themselves;
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords. But how the fear of us
May cement their divisions, and bind up
The petty difference we yet not know.
Be't as our gods will have't! It only stands
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Come, Menas.                                          Exeunt
Your hostages I have, so have you mine;
And we shall talk before we fight.
To you all three,
The senators alone of this great world,
Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you labouring for him. What was't
That mov'd pale Cassius to conspire? and what
Made the all-honour'd honest Roman, Brutus,
With the arm'd rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Have one man but a man? And that is it
Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden
The anger'd ocean foams; with which I meant
To scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful Rome
Cast on my noble father.
At land, indeed,
Thou dost o'er-count me of my father's house.
But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain in't as thou mayst.
You have made me offer
Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
Measures of wheat to Rome; this 'greed upon,
To part with unhack'd edges and bear back
Our targes undinted.
Know, then,
I came before you here a man prepar'd
To take this offer; but Mark Antony
Put me to some impatience. Though I lose
The praise of it by telling, you must know,
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Your mother came to Sicily and did find
Her welcome friendly.
Let me have your hand.
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.
Well, I know not
What counts harsh fortune casts upon my face;
But in my bosom shall she never come
To make my heart her vassal.
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed.
I crave our composition may be written,
And seal'd between us.
We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's
Draw lots who shall begin.
No, Antony, take the lot;
But, first or last, your fine Egyptian cookery
Shall have the fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Grew fat with feasting there.
I have fair meanings, sir.
Then so much have I heard;
And I have heard Apollodorus carried-
What, I pray you?
I know thee now. How far'st thou, soldier?
Let me shake thy hand.
I never hated thee; I have seen thee fight,
When I have envied thy behaviour.
Enjoy thy plainness;
It nothing ill becomes thee.
Aboard my galley I invite you all.
Will you lead, lords?
Come.               Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS and MENAS
Sit- and some wine! A health to Lepidus!
[Aside to MENAS] Say in mine ear; what is't?
[ Whispers in's ear ] Forbear me till anon-
This wine for Lepidus!
[Aside to MENAS] Go, hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that!
  Away!
Do as I bid you.- Where's this cup I call'd for?
[Aside to MENAS] I think th'art mad. [Rises and walks
aside] The matter?
Thou hast serv'd me with much faith. What's else to say?-
Be jolly, lords.
What say'st thou?
How should that be?
Hast thou drunk well?
Show me which way.
Ah, this thou shouldst have done,
And not have spoke on't. In me 'tis villainy:
In thee't had been good service. Thou must know
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour:
Mine honour, it. Repent that e'er thy tongue
Hath so betray'd thine act. Being done unknown,
I should have found it afterwards well done,
But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.
This health to Lepidus!
Fill till the cup be hid.
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
Let's ha't, good soldier.
I'll try you on the shore.
O Antony,
You have my father's house- but what? We are friends.
Come, down into the boat.
