Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
                     Enter Juliet.
Your mother.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammastide?
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years,
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
To see now how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
                                                     Exeunt.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house.
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
I know not.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.
What's this? what's this?
Anon, anon!
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.        Exeunt.
(within) Madam!
(within) Madam!
Peter!
My fan, Peter.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Is it good-den?
Out upon you! What a man are you!
By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
Romeo?
You say well.
If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
this that was so full of his ropery?
An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Lord! she will be a joyful woman.
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
No, truly, sir; not a penny.
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
when 'twas a little prating thing- O, there is a nobleman in
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger
her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
a letter?
Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the- No; I know
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
to hear it.
Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
                                                     Exeunt.
Peter, stay at the gate.
                                               [Exit Peter.]
I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than
any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.
What, have you din'd at home?
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
your mother?
O God's Lady dear!
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Ay, ay, the cords.
                                         [Throws them down.]
Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
(God save the mark!) here on his manly breast.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
[within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case!
Even so lies she,
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.           Exit.
Madam!
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke; be wary, look about.
God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
I speak no treason.
May not one speak?
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
As living here and you no use of him.
And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
What?
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.           Exit.
Ay, forsooth.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
                   Enter Old Capulet.
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
For this night's watching.
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
                                 [Draws aside the curtains.]
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
O weraday that ever I was born!
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
                       Enter Mother.
O lamentable day!
Look, look! O heavy day!
She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
O lamentable day!
O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day
That ever ever I did yet behold!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this.
O woful day! O woful day!
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
For well you know this is a pitiful case.            [Exit.]
                     Enter Peter.
