Here, master; what cheer?
Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to th' master's
whistle. Blow till thou burst thy wind, if room enough.
      Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, FERDINAND
                 GONZALO, and OTHERS
I pray now, keep below.
Do you not hear him? You mar our labour;
keep your cabins; you do assist the storm.
When the sea is. Hence! What cares these
roarers for the name of king? To cabin! silence! Trouble
us not.
None that I more love than myself. You are
counsellor; if you can command these elements to
silence, and work the peace of the present, we will not
hand a rope more. Use your authority; if you cannot, give
thanks you have liv'd so long, and make yourself ready
in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so
hap.-Cheerly, good hearts!-Out of our way, I say.
Down with the topmast. Yare, lower, lower!
Bring her to try wi' th' maincourse.  [A cry within]  A
plague upon this howling! They are louder than the
weather or our office.
       Re-enter SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, and GONZALO
Yet again! What do you here? Shall we give o'er, and
drown? Have you a mind to sink?
Work you, then.
Lay her a-hold, a-hold; set her two courses; off
to sea again; lay her off.
                Enter MARINERS, Wet
What, must our mouths be cold?
The best news is that we have safely found
Our King and company; the next, our ship-
Which but three glasses since we gave out split-
Is tight and yare, and bravely rigg'd, as when
We first put out to sea.
If I did think, sir, I were well awake,
I'd strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep,
And-how, we know not-all clapp'd under hatches;
Where, but even now, with strange and several noises
Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
And moe diversity of sounds, all horrible,
We were awak'd; straightway at liberty;
Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld
Our royal, good, and gallant ship; our master
Cap'ring to eye her. On a trice, so please you,
Even in a dream, were we divided from them,
And were brought moping hither.
