Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And soar with them above a common bound.
And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in.
A visor for a visor! What care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Why, may one ask?
And so did I.
That dreamers often lie.
O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she-
True, I talk of dreams;
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
He is wise,
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
That were some spite; my invocation
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Come, shall we go?
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
A challenge, on my life.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
                           Enter Romeo.
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
fairly last night.
The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
man to bow in the hams.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Right.
Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
narrow to an ell broad!
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art
thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
a hole.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
the argument no longer.
A sail, a sail!
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
the two.
God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
upon the prick of noon.
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
wisely.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
                                 He walks by them and sings.
               An old hare hoar,
               And an old hare hoar,
            Is very good meat in Lent;
               But a hare that is hoar
               Is too much for a score
            When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
[sings] lady, lady, lady.
                                  Exeunt Mercutio, Benvolio.
Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
moved.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for
one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
tutor me from quarrelling!
The fee simple? O simple!
                   Enter Tybalt and others.
By my heel, I care not.
And but one word with one of us?
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Could you not take some occasion without giving
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure,
                    Enter Romeo.
But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Alla stoccata carries it away.                      [Draws.]
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of
his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears
ere it be out.
Come, sir, your passado!
                                               [They fight.]
I am hurt.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Is he gone and hath nothing?
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
                                                [Exit Page.]
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
And soundly too. Your houses!
                             [Exit. [supported by Benvolio].
