Porter, remember what I gave in charge;
And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.
The plot is laid; if all things fall out right,
I shall as famous be by this exploit.
As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus' death.
Great is the rumour of this dreadful knight,
And his achievements of no less account.
Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears
To give their censure of these rare reports.
Enter MESSENGER and TALBOT.
And he is welcome. What! is this the man?
Is this the scourge of France?
Is this Talbot, so much fear'd abroad
That with his name the mothers still their babes?
I see report is fabulous and false.
I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for his grim aspect
And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf!
It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp
Should strike such terror to his enemies.
What means he now? Go ask him whither he
goes.
If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.
To me, blood-thirsty lord
And for that cause I train'd thee to my house.
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my gallery thy picture hangs;
But now the substance shall endure the like
And I will chain these legs and arms of thine
That hast by tyranny these many years
Wasted our country, slain our citizens,
And sent our sons and husbands captivate.
Laughest thou, wretch? Thy mirth shall turn to
moan.
Why, art not thou the man?
Then have I substance too.
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce;
He will be here, and yet he is not here.
How can these contrarieties agree?
Victorious Talbot! pardon my abuse.
I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited,
And more than may be gathered by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
For I am sorry that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou art.
With all my heart, and think me honoured
To feast so great a warrior in my house.              Exeunt
                        SCENE 4.
               London. The Temple garden
     Enter the EARLS OF SOMERSET, SUFFOLK, and WARWICK;
       RICHARD PLANTAGENET, VERNON, and another LAWYER
