He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laboursome petition, and at last
Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportion'd thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are most select and generous, chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all- to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.
What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
Marry, well bethought!
'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
And that in way of caution- I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honour.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
Marry, I will teach you! Think yourself a baby
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him, that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to't, I charge you. Come your ways.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
You shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before You visit him, to make inquire
Of his behaviour.
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
And in part him.' Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
'And in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well.
But if't be he I mean, he's very wild
Addicted so and so'; and there put on him
What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
As may dishonour him- take heed of that;
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.
Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
Drabbing. You may go so far.
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him,
That he is open to incontinency.
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault.
Wherefore should you do this?
Marry, sir, here's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of warrant.
You laying these slight sullies on my son
As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
Mark you,
Your party in converse, him you would sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
He closes with you in this consequence:
'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country-
And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?
By the mass, I was about to say something! Where did I leave?
At 'closes in the consequence'- Ay, marry!
He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
Or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
There was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
There falling out at tennis'; or perchance,
'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'
Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
See you now-
Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So, by my former lecture and advice,
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not
God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
Observe his inclination in yourself.
And let him ply his music.
Farewell!
                                              Exit Reynaldo.
                   Enter Ophelia.
How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?
With what, i' th' name of God I
Mad for thy love?
What said he?
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passion under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
                                                     Exeunt.
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully return'd.
Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king;
And I do think- or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath us'd to do- that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,
What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
And pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect-
Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine),
Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
                                         [Reads] the letter.
'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
  Ophelia,'-
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
  phrase.
But you shall hear. Thus:
                                                    [Reads.]
'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.     [Reads.]
      'Doubt thou the stars are fire;
        Doubt that the sun doth move;
      Doubt truth to be a liar;
        But never doubt I love.
  'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to
reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, O most best, believe
it. Adieu.
  'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
                                                      HAMLET.'
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.
What do you think of me?
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceiv'd it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had play'd the desk or table book,
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or look'd upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be.' And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves,
And all we mourn for.
Hath there been such a time- I would fain know that-
That I have Positively said ''Tis so,'
When it prov'd otherwise.?
[points to his head and shoulder] Take this from this, if this
  be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
Within the centre.
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And he not from his reason fall'n thereon
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.
Away, I do beseech you, both away
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
                   Exeunt King and Queen, [with Attendants].
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Do you know me, my lord?
Not I, my lord.
Honest, my lord?
That's very true, my lord.
I have, my lord.
[aside] How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet
he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He is far
gone, far gone! And truly in my youth I suff'red much extremity
for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again.- What do you
read, my lord?
What is the matter, my lord?
I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
[aside] Though this be madness, yet there is a method in't.-
Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [Aside] How pregnant sometimes
his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which
reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
him and my daughter.- My honourable lord, I will most humbly take
my leave of you.
Fare you well, my lord.
You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
Well be with you, gentlemen!
My lord, I have news to tell you.
The actors are come hither, my lord.
Upon my honour-
The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene
individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
the only men.
What treasure had he, my lord?
[aside] Still on my daughter.
If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
love passing well.
What follows then, my lord?
Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
 discretion.
  Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
  Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
  Repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,
  Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
  But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
  Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
  Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
  Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
  Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo! his sword,
  Which was declining on the milky head
  Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
  So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
  And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
  Did nothing.
  But, as we often see, against some storm,
  A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
  The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
  As hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
  Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
  Aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
  And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
  On Mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
  With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
  Now falls on Priam.
  Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,
  In general synod take away her power;
  Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
  And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
  As low as to the fiends!
This is too long.
That's good! 'Mobled queen' is good.
  With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
  Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
  About her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
  A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-
  Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
  'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.
  But if the gods themselves did see her then,
  When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
  In Mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
  The instant burst of clamour that she made
  (Unless things mortal move them not at all)
  Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
  And passion in the gods.'
Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
eyes. Prithee no more!
My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
Come, sirs.
'Tis most true;
And he beseech'd me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.
Ophelia, walk you here.- Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves.- [To Ophelia] Read on this book,
That show of such an exercise may colour
Your loneliness.- We are oft to blame in this,
'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The Devil himself.
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
                                  Exeunt King and Polonius].
                       Enter Hamlet.
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.- How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said.
We heard it all.- My lord, do as you please;
But if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him; or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.
And the Queen too, and that presently.
That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
I did enact Julius Caesar; I was kill'd i' th' Capitol; Brutus
kill'd me.
[to the King] O, ho! do you mark that?
Give o'er the play.
My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
It is back'd like a weasel.
Very like a whale.
I will say so.                                      Exit.
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
And that your Grace hath screen'd and stood between
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you be round with him.
[behind] What, ho! help, help, help!
[behind] O, I am slain!
