Ready, my lord.
As I learn'd,
 The night before there was no purpose in them
 Of this remove.
Made you no more offence but what you speak of?
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
Contending with the fretful elements;
 Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
 Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
 That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
 Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
 Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
 Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
 The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
 This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
 The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
 Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
 And bids what will take all.
None but the fool, who labours to outjest
 His heart-struck injuries.
I will talk further with you.
Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?
O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall 's dead,
 Slain by his servant, going to put out
 The other eye of Gloucester.
A servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
 Oppos'd against the act, bending his sword
 To his great master; who, thereat enrag'd,
 Flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead;
 But not without that harmful stroke which since
 Hath pluck'd him after.
Both, both, my lord.
 This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.
 'Tis from your sister.
Come with my lady hither.
No, my good lord; I met him back again.
Ay, my good lord. 'Twas he inform'd against him,
 And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
 Might have the freer course.
Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his
 coming forth is thought of, which imports to the kingdom so much
 fear and danger that his personal return was most required and
 necessary.
The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.
Ay, sir. She took them, read them in my presence,
 And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
 Her delicate cheek. It seem'd she was a queen
 Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
 Sought to be king o'er her.
Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove
 Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
 Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
 Were like, a better way. Those happy smilets
 That play'd on her ripe lip seem'd not to know
 What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
 As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In brief,
 Sorrow would be a rarity most belov'd,
 If all could so become it.
Faith, once or twice she heav'd the name of father
 Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart;
 Cried 'Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies! Sisters!
 Kent! father! sisters! What, i' th' storm? i' th' night?
 Let pity not be believ'd!' There she shook
 The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
 And clamour moisten'd. Then away she started
 To deal with grief alone.
No.
No, since.
Why, good sir?
Alack, poor gentleman!
'Tis so; they are afoot.
O, here he is! Lay hand upon him.- Sir,
 Your most dear daughter-
You shall have anything.
Good sir-
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
 Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter
 Who redeems nature from the general curse
 Which twain have brought her to.
Sir, speed you. What's your will?
Most sure and vulgar. Every one hears that
 Which can distinguish sound.
Near and on speedy foot. The main descry
 Stands on the hourly thought.
Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
 Her army is mov'd on.
Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep
 We put fresh garments on him.
Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
Who is conductor of his people?
They say Edgar, his banish'd son, is with the Earl of Kent
 in Germany.
The arbitrement is like to be bloody.
 Fare you well, sir.                                 [Exit.]
Help, help! O, help!
'Tis hot, it smokes.
 It came even from the heart of- O! she's dead!
Your lady, sir, your lady! and her sister
 By her is poisoned; she hath confess'd it.
