Where is the master, boson?
Hang, cur; hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker;
we are less afraid to be drown'd than thou art.
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards.
This wide-chopp'd rascal-would thou mightst lie drowning
The washing of ten tides!
Let's all sink wi' th' King.
The visitor will not give him o'er so.
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first
begins to crow?
The cock'rel.
A laughter.
Ha, ha, ha!
He could not miss't.
Temperance was a delicate wench.
Or, as 'twere perfum'd by a fen.
True; save means to live.
The ground indeed is tawny.
He misses not much.
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it
not say he lies?
Widow! a pox o' that! How came that 'widow'
in? Widow Dido!
His word is more than the miraculous harp.
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
forth more islands.
Why, in good time.
And the rarest that e'er came there.
O, widow Dido! Ay, widow Dido.
That 'sort' was well fish'd for.
And most chirurgeonly.
Very foul.
He'd sow 't with nettle-seed.
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
beginning.
None, man; all idle; whores and knaves.
Long live Gonzalo!
'Twas you we laugh'd at.
What a blow was there given!
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.
Go sleep, and hear us.
               [All sleep but ALONSO, SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO]
We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.
It is the quality o' th' climate.
Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
They fell together all, as by consent;
They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might! No more!
And yet methinks I see it in thy face,
What thou shouldst be; th' occasion speaks thee; and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.
Do you not hear me speak?
Noble Sebastian,
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep-die rather; wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.
I am more serious than my custom; you
Must be so too, if heed me; which to do
Trebles thee o'er.
I'll teach you how to flow.
O,
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish,
Whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it,
You more invest it! Ebbing men indeed,
Most often, do so near the bottom run
By their own fear or sloth.
Thus, sir:
Although this lord of weak remembrance, this
Who shall be of as little memory
When he is earth'd, hath here almost persuaded-
For he's a spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade-the King his son's alive,
'Tis as impossible that he's undrown'd
As he that sleeps here swims.
O, out of that 'no hope'
What great hope have you! No hope that way is
Another way so high a hope, that even
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
That Ferdinand is drown'd?
Then tell me,
Who's the next heir of Naples?
She that is Queen of Tunis; she that dwells
Ten leagues beyond man's life; she that from Naples
Can have no note, unless the sun were post,
The Man i' th' Moon's too slow, till newborn chins
Be rough and razorable; she that from whom
We all were sea-swallow'd, though some cast again,
And by that destiny, to perform an act
Whereof what's past is prologue, what to come
In yours and my discharge.
A space whose ev'ry cubit
Seems to cry out 'How shall that Claribel
Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis,
And let Sebastian wake.' Say this were death
That now hath seiz'd them; why, they were no worse
Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
As well as he that sleeps; lords that can prate
As amply and unnecessarily
As this Gonzalo; I myself could make
A chough of as deep chat. O, that you bore
The mind that I do! What a sleep were this
For your advancement! Do you understand me?
And how does your content
Tender your own good fortune?
True.
And look how well my garments sit upon me,
Much feater than before. My brother's servants
Were then my fellows; now they are my men.
Ay, sir; where lies that? If 'twere a kibe,
'Twould put me to my slipper; but I feel not
This deity in my bosom; twenty consciences
That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
And melt, ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
No better than the earth he lies upon,
If he were that which now he's like-that's dead;
Whom I with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
Can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus,
To the perpetual wink for aye might put
This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest,
They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk;
They'll tell the clock to any business that
We say befits the hour.
Draw together;
And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
To fall it on Gonzalo.
Then let us both be sudden.
O, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear,
To make an earthquake! Sure it was the roar
Of a whole herd of lions.
 [Aside to SEBASTIAN]  I am right glad that he's
so out of hope.
Do not, for one repulse, forgo the purpose
That you resolv'd t' effect.
 [Aside to SEBASTIAN]  Let it be to-night;
For, now they are oppress'd with travel, they
Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance
As when they are fresh.
I'll believe both;
And what does else want credit, come to me,
And I'll be sworn 'tis true; travellers ne'er did lie,
Though fools at home condemn 'em.
I'll be thy second.      Exeunt SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO
Very like; one of them
Is a plain fish, and no doubt marketable.
