How now, Mephostophilus!
He hears with ears.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and master
mine,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
Word of denial in thy labras here!
Word of denial! Froth and scum, thou liest.
O base Hungarian wight! Wilt thou the spigot
wield?                                         Exit BARDOLPH
'Convey' the wise it call. 'Steal' foh! A fico for the
phrase!
Why, then, let kibes ensue.
Young ravens must have food.
I ken the wight; he is of substance good.
Two yards, and more.
As many devils entertain; and 'To her, boy,' say I.
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!
Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam
holds,
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor;
Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk!
Wilt thou revenge?
With wit or steel?
And I to Ford shall eke unfold
How Falstaff, varlet vile,
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.
Thou art the Mars of malcontents; I second thee;
troop on.                                             Exeunt
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs.
Sir John affects thy wife.
He woos both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
He loves the gallimaufry. Ford, perpend.
With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels.
O, odious is the name!
The horn, I say. Farewell.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night;
Take heed, ere summer comes, or cuckoo birds do sing.
Away, Sir Corporal Nym.
Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.               Exit PISTOL
I will retort the sum in equipage.
Why, then the world's mine oyster. Which I with
sword will open.
Didst not thou share? Hadst thou not fifteen pence?
I do relent; what would thou more of man?
                      Enter ROBIN
 [Aside]  This punk is one of Cupid's carriers;
Clap on more sails; pursue; up with your fights;
Give fire; she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!    Exit
