You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the
same abundance as your good fortunes are; and yet, for aught I
see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that
starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be
seated in the mean: superfluity come sooner by white hairs, but
competency lives longer.
They would be better, if well followed.
Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death
have good inspirations; therefore the lott'ry that he hath
devised in these three chests, of gold, silver, and lead- whereof
who chooses his meaning chooses you- will no doubt never be
chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly love. But
what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these
princely suitors that are already come?
First, there is the Neapolitan prince.
Then is there the County Palatine.
How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?
What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of
England?
What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour?
How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony's
nephew?
If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket,
you should refuse to perform your father's will, if you should
refuse to accept him.
You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords;
they have acquainted me with their determinations, which is
indeed to return to their home, and to trouble you with no more
suit, unless you may be won by some other sort than your father's
imposition, depending on the caskets.
Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time, a
Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of
the Marquis of Montferrat?
True, madam; he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes
look'd upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.
Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight;
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath,
And comes to his election presently.
   Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON,
                PORTIA, and their trains
The ancient saying is no heresy:
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!        Exeunt
My lord and lady, it is now our time
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper
To cry 'Good joy.' Good joy, my lord and lady!
Madam, it is, so you stand pleas'd withal.
What, and stake down?
Shall they see us?
Why, shall we turn to men?
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
                                         [Presents a letter]
He attendeth here hard by
To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.
'Tis well you offer it behind her back;
The wish would make else an unquiet house.
Sir, I would speak with you.
[Aside to PORTIA]  I'll See if I can get my husband's ring,
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
                                                      Exeunt
When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
It is your music, madam, of the house.
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
What talk you of the posy or the value?
You swore to me, when I did give it you,
That you would wear it till your hour of death,
And that it should lie with you in your grave;
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judge's clerk! No, God's my judge,
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine.
And I his clerk; therefore be well advis'd
How you do leave me to mine own protection.
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possess'd of.
