Great lords and gentlemen, what means this
silence?
Dare no man answer in a case of truth?
Then say at once if I maintain'd the truth;
Or else was wrangling Somerset in th' error?
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:
The truth appears so naked on my side
That any purblind eye may find it out.
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts.
Let him that is a true-born gentleman
And stands upon the honour of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.
And I.
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?
Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our
roses;
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?
Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth;
Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and
thee.
He bears him on the place's privilege,
Or durst not for his craven heart say thus.
My father was attached, not attainted;
Condemn'd to die for treason, but no traitor;
And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset,
Were growing time once ripened to my will.
For your partaker Pole, and you yourself,
I'll note you in my book of memory
To scourge you for this apprehension.
Look to it well, and say you are well warn'd.
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I for ever, and my faction, wear,
Until it wither with me to my grave,
Or flourish to the height of my degree.
How I am brav'd, and must perforce endure
it!
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you
That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.
Thanks, gentle sir.
Come, let us four to dinner. I dare say
This quarrel will drink blood another day.            Exeunt
                         SCENE 5.
                   The Tower of London
     Enter MORTIMER, brought in a chair, and GAOLERS
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly us'd,
Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm;
And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease.
This day, in argument upon a case,
Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me;
Among which terms he us'd his lavish tongue
And did upbraid me with my father's death;
Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake,
In honour of a true Plantagenet,
And for alliance sake, declare the cause
My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.
Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant and cannot guess.
Of Which, my lord, your honour is the last.
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me.
But yet methinks my father's execution
Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.
O uncle, would some part of my young years
Might but redeem the passage of your age!
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul!
In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage,
And like a hermit overpass'd thy days.
Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast;
And what I do imagine, let that rest.
Keepers, convey him hence; and I myself
Will see his burial better than his life.
            Exeunt GAOLERS, hearing out the body of MORTIMER
Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
Chok'd with ambition of the meaner sort;
And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,
Which Somerset hath offer'd to my house,
I doubt not but with honour to redress;
And therefore haste I to the Parliament,
Either to be restored to my blood,
Or make my ill th' advantage of my good.                Exit
 [Aside]  Plantagenet, I see, must hold his
tongue,
Lest it be said 'Speak, sirrah, when you should;
Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?'
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.
Thy humble servant vows obedience
And humble service till the point of death.
And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!
And as my duty springs, so perish they
That grudge one thought against your Majesty!
