No, Caius Marcius;
I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other
Ere stay behind this business.
 [To COMINIUS]  Lead you on.
[To MARCIUS]  Follow Cominius; we must follow you;
Right worthy you priority.
My horse to yours- no.
Agreed.
So, the good horse is mine.
No, I'll nor sell nor give him; lend you him I will
For half a hundred years. Summon the town.
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!
               Enter the army of the Volsces
What is become of Marcius?
O noble fellow!
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And when it bows stand'st up. Thou art left, Marcius;
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes; but with thy grim looks and
The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds
Thou mad'st thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.
      Re-enter MARCIUS, bleeding, assaulted by the enemy
O, 'tis Marcius!
Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.
                        [They fight, and all enter the city]
Worthy sir, thou bleed'st;
Thy exercise hath been too violent
For a second course of fight.
Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!
Thou worthiest Marcius!                  Exit MARCIUS
Go sound thy trumpet in the market-place;
Call thither all the officers o' th' town,
Where they shall know our mind. Away!                 Exeunt
So, let the ports be guarded; keep your duties
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve
For a short holding. If we lose the field
We cannot keep the town.
Hence, and shut your gates upon's.
Our guider, come; to th' Roman camp conduct us.       Exeunt
O General,
Here is the steed, we the caparison.
Hadst thou beheld-
I shall, my lord.
Marcius, his name?
He had, my lord; and that it was which caus'd
Our swifter composition.
On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town. He is retir'd to Antium.
He did, my lord.
How often he had met you, sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most; that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be call'd your vanquisher.
At Antium.
