O peace, Prince Dauphin!
You are too much mistaken in this king.
Question your Grace the late ambassadors
With what great state he heard their embassy,
How well supplied with noble counsellors,
How modest in exception, and withal
How terrible in constant resolution,
And you shall find his vanities forespent
Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,
Covering discretion with a coat of folly;
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots
That shall first spring and be most delicate.
And if he be not fought withal, my lord,
Let us not live in France; let us quit an,
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.
Dieu de batailles! where have they this mettle?
Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull;
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
A drench for sur-rein'd jades, their barley-broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honour of our land,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields-
Poor we call them in their native lords!
This becomes the great.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His soldiers sick and famish'd in their march;
For I am sure, when he shall see our army,
He'll drop his heart into the sink of fear,
And for achievement offer us his ransom.
Tut! I have the best armour of the world.
Would it were day!
It is the best horse of Europe.
Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent
horse.
Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly
shook your back.
Mine was not bridled.
You have good judgment in horsemanship.
I had as lief have my mistress a jade.
I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a sow to
my mistress.
Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any such
proverb so little kin to the purpose.
Stars, my lord.
And yet my sky shall not want.
Ev'n as your horse bears your praises, who would trot as
well were some of your brags dismounted.
I will not say so, for fear I should be fac'd out of my
way; but I would it were morning, for I would fain be about the
ears of the English.
You must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them.
I think he will eat all he kills.
Swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.
Doing is activity, and he will still be doing.
Nor will do none to-morrow: he will keep that good name
still.
I was told that by one that knows him better than you.
Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he car'd not
who knew it.
By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but
  his lackey.
'Tis a hooded valour, and when it appears it will bate.
I will cap that proverb with 'There is flattery in
friendship.'
Well plac'd! There stands your friend for the devil;
have at the very eye of that proverb with 'A pox of the devil!'
You have shot over.
Who hath measur'd the ground?
A valiant and most expert gentleman. Would it were day!
Alas, poor Harry of England! he longs not for the dawning as we
do.
If the English had any apprehension, they would run
away.
Just, just! and the men do sympathise with the mastiffs
in robustious and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their
wives; and then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel;
they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.
Then shall we find to-morrow they have only stomachs to
eat, and none to fight. Now is it time to arm. Come, shall we
about it?
Hark how our steeds for present service neigh!
To horse, you gallant Princes! straight to horse!
Do but behold yon poor and starved band,
And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands;
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
To give each naked curtle-axe a stain
That our French gallants shall to-day draw out,
And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them,
The vapour of our valour will o'erturn them.
'Tis positive 'gainst all exceptions, lords,
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants-
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our squares of battle- were enow
To purge this field of, such a hilding foe;
Though we upon this mountain's basis by
Took stand for idle speculation-
But that our honours must not. What's to say?
A very little little let us do,
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
The tucket sonance and the note to mount;
For our approach shall so much dare the field
That England shall couch down in fear and yield.
                    Enter GRANDPRE
They have said their prayers and they stay for death.
I stay but for my guidon. To the field!
I will the banner from a trumpet take,
And use it for my haste. Come, come, away!
The sun is high, and we outwear the day.              Exeunt
O diable!
Why, an our ranks are broke.
Disorder, that hath spoil'd us, friend us now!
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.
