Ay, madam.
He's coming, madam; I hear him.
Very well, madam.
So please you-                                      Exit.
My lady's father.
I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
I'll not be strucken, my lord.
Yes, madam.
Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
Where may we set our horses?
Prithee, if thou lov'st me, tell me.
Why then, I care not for thee.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
What dost thou know me for?
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one
 that's neither known of thee nor knows thee!
Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
Help, ho! murther! help!
Help, ho! murther! murther!
  Enter Edmund, with his rapier drawn, Gloucester, Cornwall,
                       Regan, Servants.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.
This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spar'd
 At suit of his grey beard-
I never gave him any.
 It pleas'd the King his master very late
 To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
 When he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,
 Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd
 And put upon him such a deal of man
 That worthied him, got praises of the King
 For him attempting who was self-subdu'd;
 And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
 Drew on me here again.
My Lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence.
 Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
 Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
 Who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
 Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast
 To have well-armed friends.
Madam, within, but never man so chang'd.
 I told him of the army that was landed:
 He smil'd at it. I told him you were coming:
 His answer was, 'The worse.' Of Gloucester's treachery
 And of the loyal service of his son
 When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot
 And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out.
 What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
 What like, offensive.
Madam, here comes my lord.                          Exit.
                        Enter Albany.
Ay, madam.
Madam, with much ado.
 Your sister is the better soldier.
No, madam.
I know not, lady.
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
I may not, madam.
 My lady charg'd my duty in this business.
Madam, I had rather-
I, madam?
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
 What party I do follow.
A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!
 That eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh
 To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
 Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out
 That must destroy thee.
Wherefore, bold peasant,
 Dar'st thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence!
 Lest that th' infection of his fortune take
 Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
Let go, slave, or thou diest!
Out, dunghill!
                                                 They fight.
Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.
 If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
 And give the letters which thou find'st about me
 To Edmund Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out
 Upon the British party. O, untimely death! Death!
                                                    He dies.
