Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
So in the earth, to this day is not known.
Late did he shine upon the English side;
Now we are victors, upon us he smiles.
What towns of any moment but we have?
At pleasure here we lie near Orleans;
Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts,
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.
Sound, sound alarum; we will rush on them.
Now for the honour of the forlorn French!
Him I forgive my death that killeth me,
When he sees me go back one foot or flee.             Exeunt
   Here alarum. They are beaten hack by the English, with
     great loss. Re-enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER
Who ever saw the like? What men have I!
Dogs! cowards! dastards! I would ne'er have fled
But that they left me midst my enemies.
Let's leave this town; for they are hare-brain'd
slaves,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager.
Of old I know them; rather with their teeth
The walls they'll tear down than forsake the siege.
Bastard of Orleans, thrice welcome to us.
Go, call her in.                       [Exit BASTARD]
But first, to try her skill,
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place;
Question her proudly; let thy looks be stern;
By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.
              Re-enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS with
                      JOAN LA PUCELLE
Thou hast astonish'd me with thy high terms.
Only this proof I'll of thy valour make
In single combat thou shalt buckle with me;
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true;
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
Then come, o' God's name; I fear no woman.
Stay, stay thy hands; thou art an Amazon,
And fightest with the sword of Deborah.
Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me.
Impatiently I burn with thy desire;
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdu'd.
Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant and not sovereign be.
'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.
What she says I'll confirm; we'll fight it out.
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?
Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters were like thee.
Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?
Presently we'll try. Come, let's away about it.
No prophet will I trust if she prove false.           Exeunt
                      SCENE 3.
            London. Before the Tower gates
   Enter the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, with his serving-men
                   in blue coats
Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter,
How shall I honour thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Adonis' gardens,
That one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess.
Recover'd is the town of Orleans.
More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.
'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won;
For which I will divide my crown with her;
And all the priests and friars in my realm
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
A statelier pyramis to her I'll rear
Than Rhodope's of Memphis ever was.
In memory of her, when she is dead,
Her ashes, in an urn more precious
Than the rich jewel'd coffer of Darius,
Transported shall be at high festivals
Before the kings and queens of France.
No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,
But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.
Come in, and let us banquet royally
After this golden day of victory. Flourish.           Exeunt
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,
Make us partakers of a little gain
That now our loss might be ten times so much?
Duke of Alencon, this was your default
That, being captain of the watch to-night,
Did look no better to that weighty charge.
And, for myself, most part of all this night,
Within her quarter and mine own precinct
I was employ'd in passing to and fro
About relieving of the sentinels.
Then how or which way should they first break in?
Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem!
And once again we'll sleep secure in Rouen.
Now shine it like a comet of revenge,
A prophet to the fall of all our foes!
Your Grace may starve, perhaps, before that time.
We have guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy cunning had no diffidence;
One sudden foil shall never breed distrust
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
France were no place for Henry's warriors;
Nor should that nation boast it so with us,
But be extirped from our provinces.
A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.
Welcome, brave Duke! Thy friendship makes us
fresh.
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the foe.                Exeunt
                      SCENE 4.
                 Paris. The palace
     Enter the KING, GLOUCESTER, WINCHESTER, YORK,
         SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK, EXETER,
       VERNON, BASSET, and others. To them, with
                 his soldiers, TALBOT
Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.
O, no; forbear! For that which we have fled
During the life, let us not wrong it dead.
        Enter SIR WILLIAM Lucy, attended; a FRENCH
                     HERALD preceding
On what submissive message art thou sent?
For prisoners ask'st thou? Hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seek'st.
Go, take their bodies hence.
So we be rid of them, do with them what thou
wilt.
And now to Paris in this conquering vein!
All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.          Exeunt
These news, my lords, may cheer our drooping
spirits:
'Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
And turn again unto the warlike French.
What tidings send our scouts? I prithee speak.
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is;
But we will presently provide for them.
Then on, my lords; and France be fortunate!
                                                      Exeunt
                        SCENE 3.
                     Before Angiers
          Alarum, excursions. Enter LA PUCELLE
Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed
That peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in France,
We come to be informed by yourselves
What the conditions of that league must be.
'Tis known already that I am possess'd
With more than half the Gallian territories,
And therein reverenc'd for their lawful king.
Shall I, for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd,
Detract so much from that prerogative
As to be call'd but viceroy of the whole?
No, Lord Ambassador; I'll rather keep
That which I have than, coveting for more,
Be cast from possibility of all.
It shall;
Only reserv'd, you claim no interest
In any of our towns of garrison.
