Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines; the
Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.
The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is
given, is altogether directed by an Irishman- a very vallant
gentleman, i' faith.
I think it be.
Here 'a comes; and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with
him.
How now, Captain Macmorris! Have you quit the mines? Have
the pioneers given o'er?
Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.
The town sounds a parley.
How now, Captain Fluellen! Come you from the bridge?
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?
What do you call him?
I know him not.
                        Enter PISTOL
Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal; I remember him
now- a bawd, a cutpurse.
Why, 'tis a gull a fool a rogue, that now and then goes to
the wars to grace himself, at his return into London, under the
form of a soldier. And such fellows are perfect in the great
commanders' names; and they will learn you by rote where services
were done- at such and such a sconce, at such a breach, at such a
convoy; who came off bravely, who was shot, who disgrac'd, what
terms the enemy stood on; and this they con perfectly in the
phrase of war, which they trick up with new-tuned oaths; and what
a beard of the General's cut and a horrid suit of the camp will
do among foaming bottles and ale-wash'd wits is wonderful to be
thought on. But you must learn to know such slanders of the age,
or else you may be marvellously mistook.
Captain Fluellen!
Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all night.
I will speak lower.
'Tis certain there's not a boy left alive; and the cowardly
rascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter;
besides, they have burned and carried away all that was in the
King's tent; wherefore the King most worthily hath caus'd every
soldier to cut his prisoner's throat. O, 'tis a gallant King!
Alexander the Great.
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon; his father
was called Philip of Macedon, as I take it.
Our king is not like him in that: he never kill'd any of his
friends.
Sir John Falstaff.
Here comes his Majesty.
        Alarum. Enter the KING, WARWICK, GLOUCESTER,
        EXETER, and others, with prisoners. Flourish
How now, sir! you villain!
Nay, that's right; but why wear you your leek to-day? Saint
Davy's day is past.
Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.
Enough, Captain, you have astonish'd him.
Go, go: you are a couterfeit cowardly knave. Will you mock
at an ancient tradition, begun upon an honourable respect, and
worn as a memorable trophy of predeceased valour, and dare not
avouch in your deeds any of your words? I have seen you gleeking
and galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. You thought,
because he could not speak English in the native garb, he could
not therefore handle an English cudgel; you find it otherwise,
and henceforth let a Welsh correction teach you a good English
condition. Fare ye well.                                Exit
