            The Duke does greet you, general,
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,
Even on the instant.
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine;
It is a business of some heat. The galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another's heels;
And many of the consuls, raised and met,
Are at the Duke's already. You have been hotly call'd for,
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The Senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out.
           Ancient, what makes he here?
I do not understand.
                                   To who?
                      Re-enter Othello.
Here comes another troop to seek for you.
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
Give him defense against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
His bark is stoutly timber'd, and his pilot
Of very expert and approved allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.
                          A cry within, "A sail, a sail, a sail!"
                  Enter a fourth Gentleman.
                    What noise?
My hopes do shape him for the governor.
                                                      Guns heard.
                I pray you, sir, go forth,
And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.
Most fortunately: he hath achieved a maid
That paragons description and wild fame,
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in the essential vesture of creation
Does tire the ingener.
                  Re-enter second Gentleman.
                       How now! who has put in?
He has had most favorable and happy speed:
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The gutter'd rocks, and congregated sands,
Traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.
She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A se'nnight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,
Give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort.
   Enter Desdemona, Emilia Iago, Roderigo, and Attendants.
                              O, behold,
The riches of the ship is come on shore!
Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
Hall to thee, lady! And the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
Enwheel thee round!
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
But that he's well and will be shortly here.
The great contention of the sea and skies
Parted our fellowship- But, hark! a sail.
                      A cry within, "A sail, a sail!" Guns heard.
                     See for the news.
                                                  Exit Gentleman.
Good ancient, you are welcome. [To Emilia.] Welcome, mistress.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners; 'tis my breeding
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.             Kisses her.
He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the
soldier than in the scholar.
'Tis truly so.
Lo, where he comes!
                Enter Othello and Attendants.
Iago hath direction what to do;
But notwithstanding with my personal eye
Will I look to't.
Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.
She's a most exquisite lady.
Indeed she's a most fresh and delicate creature.
An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.
She is indeed perfection.
Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains
for drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other
custom of entertainment.
I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily
qualified too, and behold what innovation it makes here. I am
unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with
any more.
Where are they?
I'll do't, but it dislikes me.                        Exit.
'Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.
'Fore God, an excellent song.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?
To the health of our general!
Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does
those things. Well, God's above all, and there be souls must be
saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
For mine own part- no offense to the general, nor any man
of quality- I hope to be saved.
Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the lieutenant is to
be saved before the ancient. Let's have no more of this; let's to
our affairs. God forgive us our sins! Gentlemen, let's look to
our business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk: this is my
ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not
drunk now; I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.
Why, very well then; you must not think then that I am
drunk.                                                      Exit.
'Zounds! You rogue! You rascal!
A knave teach me my duty! But I'll beat the knave into a
twiggen bottle.
Dost thou prate, rogue?                   Strikes Roderigo.
Let me go, sir, or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard.
Drunk?                                          They fight.
I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.
Ay, past all surgery.
Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my
reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what
remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a
commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an
officer. Drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear?
and discourse fustian with one's own shadow? O thou invisible
spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call
thee devil!
I know not.
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a
quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men should put an
enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains! that we should,
with joy, pleasance, revel, and applause, transform ourselves
into beasts!
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the
devil wrath: one unperfectness shows me another, to make me
frankly despise myself.
I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me I am a
drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would
stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and
presently a beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is unblest,
and the ingredient is a devil.
I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
You advise me well.
I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will beseech
the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I am desperate of my
fortunes if they check me here.
Good night, honest Iago.                              Exit.
Masters, play here, I will content your pains; Something
that's brief; and bid "Good morrow, general."
Music.
                         Enter Clown.
Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There's a poor piece of gold
for thee. If the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife be
stirring, tell her there's one Cassio entreats her a little favor
of speech. Wilt thou do this?
Do, good my friend.                             Exit Clown.
                         Enter Iago.
                          In happy time, Iago.
Why, no; the day had broke
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife. My suit to her
Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.
I humbly thank you for't. [Exit Iago.] I never knew
A Florentine more kind and honest.
                        Enter Emilia.
                 Yet, I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemona alone.
                      I am much bound to you.
                   Bounteous madam,
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He's never anything but your true servant.
                      Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstances,
That I being absent and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.
Madam, I'll take my leave.
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.
Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist and be a member of his love
Whom I with all the office of my heart
Entirely honor. I would not be delay'd.
If my offense be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past nor present sorrows
Nor purposed merit in futurity
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit;
So shall I clothe me in a forced content
And shut myself up in some other course
To Fortune's alms.
I humbly thank your ladyship.
                                     Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.
                        Enter Bianca.
                         What make you from home?
How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
I'faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
             Pardon me, Bianca.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd;
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,
                              Gives her Desdemona's handkerchief.
Take me this work out.
                         Go to, woman!
Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance.
No, by my faith, Bianca.
I know not, sweet. I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well. Ere it be demanded-
As like enough it will- I'ld have it copied.
Take it, and do't; and leave me for this time.
I do attend here on the general;
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me woman'd.
Not that I love you not.
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here, but I'll see you soon.
What's the matter?
Rub him about the temples.
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.
                        Alas, poor caitiff!
Alas, poor rogue! I think, i'faith, she loves me.
Ha, ha, ha!
I marry her! What? A customer! I prithee, bear some charity
to my wit; do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!
Prithee, say true.
This is the monkey's own giving out. She is persuaded I
will marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my
promise.
She was here even now; she haunts me in every place. I was
the other day talking on the sea bank with certain Venetians, and
thither comes the bauble, and, by this hand, she falls me thus
about my neck-
So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me; so hales and pulls
me. Ha, ha, ha!
Well, I must leave her company.
'Tis such another fitchew! marry, a perfumed one.
                        Enter Bianca.
What do you mean by this haunting of me?
How now, my sweet Bianca! how now! how now!
Faith, I must; she'll rail i' the street else.
Faith, I intend so.
Prithee, come; will you?
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my coat is better than thou know'st;
I will make proof of thine.           Draws, and wounds Roderigo.
I am maim'd forever. Help, ho! Murther! Murther!
Falls.
                        Enter Othello.
O, help, ho! Light! A surgeon!
What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murther! Murther!
O, help!
Here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!
Iago? O, I am spoil'd, undone by villains!
Give me some help.
I think that one of them is hereabout,
And cannot make away.
That's one of them.
My leg is cut in two.
No.
None in the world; nor do I know the man.
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
            Most heathenish and most gross!
              I found it in my chamber;
And he himself confess'd but even now
That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.
There is besides in Roderigo's letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
That I was cast. And even but now he spake
After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon;
For he was great of heart.
