Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolv'd you know;
That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder.
If either of you both love Katherina,
Because I know you well and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said- Bianca, get you in;
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolv'd.
Go in, Bianca.                                   Exit BIANCA
And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments, and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Or, Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing-up;
And so, farewell. Katherina, you may stay;
For I have more to commune with Bianca.                 Exit
Why, how now, dame! Whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside- poor girl! she weeps.
                                            [He unbinds her]
Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.
                                                 Exit BIANCA
Was ever gentleman thus griev'd as I?
But who comes here?
    Enter GREMIO, with LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man;
     PETRUCHIO, with HORTENSIO as a musician; and TRANIO,
as LUCENTIO, with his boy, BIONDELLO, bearing a lute and books
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
God save you, gentlemen!
I have a daughter, sir, call'd Katherina.
Y'are welcome, sir, and he for your good sake;
But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
I know him well; you are welcome for his sake.
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio.
[To TRANIO]  But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger.
May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
Lucentio is your name? Of whence, I pray?
A mighty man of Pisa. By report
I know him well. You are very welcome, sir.
Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
                     Enter a SERVANT
Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters; and tell them both
These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
            Exit SERVANT leading HORTENSIO carrying the lute
                                 and LUCENTIO with the books
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
After my death, the one half of my lands
And, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.
How now, my friend! Why dost thou look so pale?
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
Well, go with me, and be not so discomfited;
Proceed in practice with my younger daughter;
She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
Why, how now, daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
I know not what to say; but give me your hands.
God send you joy, Petruchio! 'Tis a match.
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
The gain I seek is quiet in the match.
Content you, gentlemen; I will compound this strife.
'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Bianca's love.
Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
I must confess your offer is the best;
And let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own. Else, you must pardon me;
If you should die before him, where's her dower?
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolv'd: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katherine is to be married;
Now, on the Sunday following shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you make this assurance;
If not, to Signior Gremio.
And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
 [To TRANIO]  Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day
That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
What will be said? What mockery will it be
To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
For such an injury would vex a very saint;
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.
                       Enter BIONDELLO
Master, master! News, and such old news as you never heard of!
Is it new and old too? How may that be?
Is he come?
What then?
When will he be here?
Who comes with him?
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
Didst thou not say he comes?
Ay, that Petruchio came.
Why, that's all one.
You are welcome, sir.
And yet you halt not.
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day.
First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
I'll after him and see the event of this.
          Exeunt BAPTISTA, GREMIO, BIONDELLO, and ATTENDENTS
Is't possible you will away to-night?
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
Neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place;
And let Bianca take her sister's room.
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.
                                                      Exeunt
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections;
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him,
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done-
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants;
Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,
And happily we might be interrupted.
It likes me well. Cambio, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And, if you will, tell what hath happened-
Lucentio's father is arriv'd in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.      Exit LUCENTIO
I follow you.                                 Exeunt
        Re-enter LUCENTIO as CAMBIO, and BIONDELLO
What, is the man lunatic?
You mistake, sir; you mistake, sir. Pray, what do you
think is his name?
Talk not, Signior Gremio; I say he shall go to prison.
Away with the dotard; to the gaol with him!
How hast thou offended?
Where is Lucentio?
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
 [To LUCENTIO]  But do you hear, sir? Have you married my
daughter without asking my good will?
And I to sound the depth of this knavery.       Exit
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
O, O, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
Son, I'll be your half Bianca comes.
Now, by my holidame, here comes Katherina!
Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won; and I will ad
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is chang'd, as she had never been.
