PAGE. What! have I scap'd love-letters in the holiday-time
of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? Let
me see.                                              [Reads]
'Ask me no reason why I love you; for though Love use
Reason for his precisian, he admits him not for his counsellor.
You are not young, no more am I; go to, then, there's
sympathy. You are merry, so am I; ha! ha! then there's
more sympathy. You love sack, and so do I; would you
desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page
at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice-that I love
thee. I will not say, Pity me: 'tis not a soldier-like phrase;
but I say, Love me. By me,
Thine own true knight,
By day or night,
Or any kind of light,
With all his might,
For thee to fight,
JOHN FALSTAFF.'
What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked, wicked world!
One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age to show
himself a young gallant! What an unweighed behaviour
hath this Flemish drunkard pick'd-with the devil's name!
-out of my conversation, that he dares in this manner
assay me? Why, he hath not been thrice in my company!
What should I say to him? I was then frugal of my mirth.
Heaven forgive me! Why, I'll exhibit a bill in the parliament
for the putting down of men. How shall I be
reveng'd on him? for reveng'd I will be, as sure as his guts
are made of puddings.
                   Enter MISTRESS FORD
FORD. Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your
house.
PAGE. And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look
very ill.
FORD. Nay, I'll ne'er believe that; I have to show to
the contrary.
PAGE. Faith, but you do, in my mind.
FORD. Well, I do, then; yet, I say, I could show you to
the contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel.
PAGE. What's the matter, woman?
FORD. O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect,
I could come to such honour!
PAGE. Hang the trifle, woman; take the honour. What
is it? Dispense with trifles; what is it?
FORD. If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment
or so, I could be knighted.
PAGE. What? Thou liest. Sir Alice Ford! These knights
will hack; and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy
gentry.
FORD. We burn daylight. Here, read, read; perceive
how I might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat
men as long as I have an eye to make difference of men's
liking. And yet he would not swear; prais'd women's
modesty, and gave such orderly and well-behaved reproof
to all uncomeliness that I would have sworn his disposition
would have gone to the truth of his words; but they do no
more adhere and keep place together than the Hundredth
Psalm to the tune of 'Greensleeves.' What tempest, I trow,
threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his belly,
ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged on him? I
think the best way were to entertain him with hope, till
the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease.
Did you ever hear the like?
PAGE. Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
Ford differs. To thy great comfort in this mystery of ill
opinions, here's the twin-brother of thy letter; but let thine
inherit first, for, I protest, mine never shall. I warrant he
hath a thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
different names-sure, more!-and these are of the second
edition. He will print them, out of doubt; for he cares not
what he puts into the press when he would put us two. I
had rather be a giantess and lie under Mount Pelion. Well,
I will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste
man.
FORD. Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the
very words. What doth he think of us?
PAGE. Nay, I know not; it makes me almost ready to
wrangle with mine own honesty. I'll entertain myself like
one that I am not acquainted withal; for, sure, unless he
know some strain in me that I know not myself, he would
never have boarded me in this fury.
FORD. 'Boarding' call you it? I'll be sure to keep him
above deck.
PAGE. So will I; if he come under my hatches, I'll never
to sea again. Let's be reveng'd on him; let's appoint him a
meeting, give him a show of comfort in his suit, and lead
him on with a fine-baited delay, till he hath pawn'd his
horses to mine host of the Garter.
FORD. Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against
him that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O
that my husband saw this letter! It would give eternal food
to his jealousy.
PAGE. Why, look where he comes; and my good man
too; he's as far from jealousy as I am from giving him
cause; and that, I hope, is an unmeasurable distance.
FORD. You are the happier woman.
PAGE. Let's consult together against this greasy knight.
Come hither.                                   [They retire]
       Enter FORD with PISTOL, and PAGE with Nym
PAGE. Whither go you, George? Hark you.
FORD. How now, sweet Frank, why art thou melancholy?
FORD. Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head now.
Will you go, Mistress Page?
                 Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
PAGE. Have with you. You'll come to dinner, George?
[Aside to MRS. FORD]  Look who comes yonder; she shall
be our messenger to this paltry knight.
FORD.  [Aside to MRS. PAGE]  Trust me, I thought on
her; she'll fit it.
PAGE. You are come to see my daughter Anne?
PAGE. Go in with us and see; we have an hour's talk
with you.           Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and
                                            MISTRESS QUICKLY
PAGE. Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were
wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether
had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels?
PAGE. O, you are a flattering boy; now I see you'll be a
courtier.
                      Enter FORD
PAGE. Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?
PAGE. Be sure of that-two other husbands.
PAGE. I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
husband had him of. What do you call your knight's
name, sirrah?
PAGE. He, he; I can never hit on's name. There is such
a league between my good man and he! Is your wife at
home indeed?
PAGE. By your leave, sir. I am sick till I see her.
                                  Exeunt MRS. PAGE and ROBIN
FORD. What, John! what, Robert!
PAGE. Quickly, quickly! Is the buck-basket-
FORD. I warrant. What, Robin, I say!
             Enter SERVANTS with a basket
PAGE. Come, come, come.
FORD. Here, set it down.
PAGE. Give your men the charge; we must be brief.
FORD. Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be
ready here hard by in the brew-house; and when I suddenly
call you, come forth, and, without any pause or
staggering, take this basket on your shoulders. That done,
trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters
in Datchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch
close by the Thames side.
PAGE. You will do it?
FORD. I ha' told them over and over; they lack no
direction. Be gone, and come when you are call'd.
                                           Exeunt SERVANTS
PAGE. Here comes little Robin.
                     Enter ROBIN
FORD. How now, my eyas-musket, what news with
you?
PAGE. You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
PAGE. Thou 'rt a good boy; this secrecy of thine shall
be a tailor to thee, and shall make thee a new doublet and
hose. I'll go hide me.
FORD. Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.  [Exit
PAGE. I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.
                                            Exit MRS. PAGE
FORD. Go to, then; we'll use this unwholesome
humidity, this gross wat'ry pumpion; we'll teach him to
know turtles from jays.
                  Enter FALSTAFF
FORD. O sweet Sir John!
FORD. I your lady, Sir John? Alas, I should be a pitiful
lady.
FORD. A plain kerchief, Sir John; my brows become
nothing else, nor that well neither.
FORD. Believe me, there's no such thing in me.
FORD. Do not betray me, sir; I fear you love Mistress
Page.
FORD. Well, heaven knows how I love you; and you
shall one day find it.
FORD. Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could
not be in that mind.
FORD. Pray you, do so; she's a very tattling woman.
                                  [FALSTAFF hides himself]
           Re-enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN
What's the matter? How now!
PAGE. O Mistress Ford, what have you done? You're
sham'd, y'are overthrown, y'are undone for ever.
FORD. What's the matter, good Mistress Page?
PAGE. O well-a-day, Mistress Ford, having an honest
man to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
FORD. What cause of suspicion?
PAGE. What cause of suspicion? Out upon you, how
am I mistook in you!
FORD. Why, alas, what's the matter?
PAGE. Your husband's coming hither, woman, with all
the officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that he
says is here now in the house, by your consent, to take an
ill advantage of his absence. You are undone.
FORD. 'Tis not so, I hope.
PAGE. Pray heaven it be not so that you have such a
man here; but 'tis most certain your husband's coming,
with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a one. I
come before to tell you. If you know yourself clear, why,
I am glad of it; but if you have a friend here, convey,
convey him out. Be not amaz'd; call all your senses to you;
defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life
for ever.
FORD. What shall I do? There is a gentleman, my dear
friend; and I fear not mine own shame as much as his peril.
I had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the
house.
PAGE. For shame, never stand 'you had rather' and 'you
had rather'! Your husband's here at hand; bethink you of
some conveyance; in the house you cannot hide him. O,
how have you deceiv'd me! Look, here is a basket; if he be
of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here; and throw
foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking, or-it is
whiting-time-send him by your two men to Datchet
Mead.
FORD. He's too big to go in there. What shall I do?
PAGE. What, Sir John Falstaff!      [Aside to FALSTAFF]
Are these your letters, knight?
PAGE. Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,
Mistress Ford. You dissembling knight!
FORD. What, John! Robert! John!                Exit ROBIN
             Re-enter SERVANTS
Go, take up these clothes here, quickly; where's the
cowl-staff? Look how you drumble. Carry them to the laundress
in Datchet Mead; quickly, come.
     Enter FORD, PAGE, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
FORD. Why, what have you to do whither they bear it?
You were best meddle with buck-washing.
PAGE. Is there not a double excellency in this?
FORD. I know not which pleases me better, that my
husband is deceived, or Sir John.
PAGE. What a taking was he in when your husband
ask'd who was in the basket!
FORD. I am half afraid he will have need of washing; so
throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.
PAGE. Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the
same strain were in the same distress.
FORD. I think my husband hath some special suspicion
of Falstaff's being here, for I never saw him so gross in his
jealousy till now.
PAGE. I Will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have
more tricks with Falstaff. His dissolute disease will scarce
obey this medicine.
FORD. Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mistress
Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the water,
and give him another hope, to betray him to another
punishment?
PAGE. We will do it; let him be sent for to-morrow
eight o'clock, to have amends.
   Re-enter FORD, PAGE, CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
PAGE.  [Aside to MRS. FORD]  Heard you that?
FORD. You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
FORD. Heaven make you better than your thoughts!
PAGE. You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.
PAGE. Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
PAGE. I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.
PAGE. Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master
Fenton,
I will not be your friend, nor enemy;
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected;
Till then, farewell, sir; she must needs go in;
Her father will be angry.
PAGE. Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou?
PAGE. I'll be with her by and by; I'll but bring my
young man here to school. Look where his master comes;
'tis a playing day, I see.
                 Enter SIR HUGH EVANS
How now, Sir Hugh, no school to-day?
PAGE. Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits
nothing in the world at his book; I pray you ask him some
questions in his accidence.
PAGE. Come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer your
master; be not afraid.
PAGE. Peace.
PAGE. Prithee hold thy peace.
PAGE. He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
PAGE. Adieu, good Sir Hugh.                 Exit SIR HUGH
Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.            Exeunt
FORD. He's a-birding, sweet Sir John.
PAGE.  [Within]  What hoa, gossip Ford, what hoa!
FORD. Step into th' chamber, Sir John.      Exit FALSTAFF
                  Enter MISTRESS PAGE
PAGE. How now, sweetheart, who's at home besides
yourself?
FORD. Why, none but mine own people.
PAGE. Indeed?
FORD. No, certainly.  [Aside to her]  Speak louder.
PAGE. Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.
FORD. Why?
PAGE. Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes
again. He so takes on yonder with my husband; so rails
against all married mankind; so curses an Eve's daughters,
of what complexion soever; and so buffets himself on the
forehead, crying 'Peer-out, peer-out!' that any madness I
ever yet beheld seem'd but tameness, civility, and patience,
to this his distemper he is in now. I am glad the fat knight
is not here.
FORD. Why, does he talk of him?
PAGE. Of none but him; and swears he was carried out,
the last time he search'd for him, in a basket; protests to
my husband he is now here; and hath drawn him and the
rest of their company from their sport, to make another
experiment of his suspicion. But I am glad the knight is not
here; now he shall see his own foolery.
FORD. How near is he, Mistress Page?
PAGE. Hard by, at street end; he will be here anon.
FORD. I am undone: the knight is here.
PAGE. Why, then, you are utterly sham'd, and he's but
a dead man. What a woman are you! Away with him,
away with him; better shame than murder.
FORD. Which way should he go? How should I bestow
him? Shall I put him into the basket again?
              Re-enter FALSTAFF
PAGE. Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers watch the
door with pistols, that none shall issue out; otherwise you
might slip away ere he came. But what make you here?
FORD. There they always use to discharge their
birding-pieces.
PAGE. Creep into the kiln-hole.
FORD. He will seek there, on my word. Neither press,
coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he hath an abstract for
the remembrance of such places, and goes to them by his
note. There is no hiding you in the house.
PAGE. If you go out in your own semblance, you die,
Sir John. Unless you go out disguis'd.
FORD. How might we disguise him?
PAGE. Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's
gown big enough for him; otherwise he might put on a
hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and so escape.
FORD. My Maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brainford, has
a gown above.
PAGE. On my word, it will serve him; she's as big as he
is; and there's her thrumm'd hat, and her muffler too. Run
up, Sir John.
FORD. Go, go, sweet Sir John. Mistress Page and I will
look some linen for your head.
PAGE. Quick, quick; we'll come dress you straight. Put
on the gown the while.                         Exit FALSTAFF
FORD. I would my husband would meet him in this
shape; he cannot abide the old woman of Brainford; he
swears she's a witch, forbade her my house, and hath
threat'ned to beat her.
PAGE. Heaven guide him to thy husband's cudgel; and
the devil guide his cudgel afterwards!
FORD. But is my husband coming?
PAGE. Ay, in good sadness is he; and talks of the basket
too, howsoever he hath had intelligence.
FORD. We'll try that; for I'll appoint my men to carry
the basket again, to meet him at the door with it as they
did last time.
PAGE. Nay, but he'll be here presently; let's go dress
him like the witch of Brainford.
FORD. I'll first direct my men what they shall do with
the basket. Go up; I'll bring linen for him straight.   Exit
PAGE. Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse
him enough.
We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry and yet honest too.
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
'Tis old but true: Still swine eats all the draff.      Exit
        Re-enter MISTRESS FORD, with two SERVANTS
FORD. Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders;
your master is hard at door; if he bid you set it down, obey
him; quickly, dispatch.                                 Exit
FORD. Heaven be my witness, you do, if you suspect
me in any dishonesty.
FORD. Are you not asham'd? Let the clothes alone.
FORD. Why, man, why?
FORD. If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's
death.
FORD. What, hoa, Mistress Page! Come you and the old
woman down; my husband will come into the chamber.
FORD. Why, it is my maid's aunt of Brainford.
FORD. Nay, good sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let
him not strike the old woman.
PAGE. Come, Mother Prat; come. give me your hand.
PAGE. Are you not asham'd? I think you have kill'd the
poor woman.
FORD. Nay, he will do it. 'Tis a goodly credit for you.
PAGE. Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.
FORD. Nay, by th' mass, that he did not; he beat him
most unpitifully methought.
PAGE. I'll have the cudgel hallow'd and hung o'er the
altar; it hath done meritorious service.
FORD. What think you? May we, with the warrant of
womanhood and the witness of a good conscience, pursue
him with any further revenge?
PAGE. The spirit of wantonness is sure scar'd out of
him; if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and
recovery, he will never, I think, in the way of waste,
attempt us again.
FORD. Shall we tell our husbands how we have serv'd
him?
PAGE. Yes, by all means; if it be but to scrape the
figures out of your husband's brains. If they can find in their
hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further
afflicted, we two will still be the ministers.
FORD. I'll warrant they'll have him publicly sham'd;
and methinks there would be no period to the jest, should
he not be publicly sham'd.
PAGE. Come, to the forge with it then; shape it. I
would not have things cool.                           Exeunt
PAGE. Within a quarter of an hour.
FORD. Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
PAGE. There is an old tale goes that Heme the Hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest,
Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great ragg'd horns;
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed eld
Receiv'd, and did deliver to our age,
This tale of Heme the Hunter for a truth.
FORD. Marry, this is our device-
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us,
Disguis'd, like Heme, with huge horns on his head.
PAGE. That likewise have we thought upon, and
thus:
Nan Page my daughter, and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth, we'll dress
Like urchins, ouphes, and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands; upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song; upon their sight
We two in great amazedness will fly.
Then let them all encircle him about,
And fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight;
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
In shape profane.
FORD. And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound,
And burn him with their tapers.
PAGE. The truth being known,
We'll all present ourselves; dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.
PAGE. My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.
PAGE. Fear not you that. Go get us properties
And tricking for our fairies.
PAGE. Go, Mistress Ford.
Send Quickly to Sir John to know his mind.
                                              Exit MRS. FORD
I'll to the Doctor; he hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot;
And he my husband best of all affects.
The Doctor is well money'd, and his friends
Potent at court; he, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.      Exit
PAGE. Master Doctor, my daughter is in green; when
you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her to
the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. Go before into the
Park; we two must go together.
PAGE. Fare you well, sir.  [Exit CAIUS]  My husband
will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will
chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter; but 'tis no
matter; better a little chiding than a great deal of
heartbreak.
FORD. Where is Nan now, and her troop of fairies, and
the Welsh devil, Hugh?
PAGE. They are all couch'd in a pit hard by Heme's
oak, with obscur'd lights; which, at the very instant of
Falstaff's and our meeting, they will at once display to the
night.
FORD. That cannot choose but amaze him.
PAGE. If he be not amaz'd, he will be mock'd; if he be
amaz'd, he will every way be mock'd.
FORD. We'll betray him finely.
PAGE. Against such lewdsters and their lechery,
Those that betray them do no treachery.
FORD. The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
                                                      Exeunt
FORD. Sir John! Art thou there, my deer, my male deer.
FORD. Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
PAGE. Alas, what noise?
FORD. Heaven forgive our sins!
FORD. } Away, away.
PAGE. } Away, away.                        [They run off]
PAGE. I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher.
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband? Do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?
FORD. Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never
meet. I will never take you for my love again; but I will
always count you my deer.
PAGE. Why, Sir John, do you think, though we would
have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the head and
shoulders, and have given ourselves without scruple to hell,
that ever the devil could have made you our delight?
PAGE. A puff'd man?
PAGE.  [Aside]  Doctors doubt that; if Anne Page be
my daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius' wife.
                    Enter SLENDER
PAGE. Good George, be not angry. I knew of your
purpose; turn'd my daughter into green; and, indeed, she
is now with the Doctor at the dean'ry, and there married.
                     Enter CAIUS
PAGE. Why, did you take her in green?
PAGE. Why went you not with Master Doctor, maid?
PAGE. Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire;
Sir John and all.
