Mi perdonato, gentle master mine;
I am in all affected as yourself;
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Let's be no Stoics nor no stocks, I pray,
Or so devote to Aristotle's checks
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd.
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
Music and poesy use to quicken you;
The mathematics and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en;
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Husht, master! Here's some good pastime toward;
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?
Master, it is no time to chide you now;
Affection is not rated from the heart;
If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so:
'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.'
Master, you look'd so longly on the maid.
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
Saw you no more? Mark'd you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
Nay, then 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir. If you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd
That, till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home;
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.
Ay, marry, am I, sir, and now 'tis plotted.
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
You will be schoolmaster,
And undertake the teaching of the maid-
That's your device.
Not possible; for who shall bear your part
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son;
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
So had you need.                [They exchange habits]
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient-
For so your father charg'd me at our parting:
'Be serviceable to my son' quoth he,
Although I think 'twas in another sense-
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for my sake but your master's, I advise
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
But in all places else your master Lucentio.
Gentlemen, God save you! If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
Even he, Biondello.
Perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let's away.
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you?
For what reason, I beseech you?
Softly, my masters! If you be gentlemen,
Do me this right- hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman,
To whom my father is not all unknown,
And, were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have, and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
And so she shall: Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two:
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest;
And if you break the ice, and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access- whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health;
And do as adversaries do in law-
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own
That, being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request-
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
And free access and favour as the rest.
And toward the education of your daughters
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.
Is this your speeding? Nay, then good-night our part!
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you;
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
Greybeard, thy love doth freeze.
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my father's heir and only son;
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good
Within rich Pisa's walls as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio?
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses,
And twelve tight galleys. These I will assure her,
And twice as much whate'er thou off'rest next.
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world
By your firm promise; Gremio is out-vied.
That's but a cavil; he is old, I young.
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
Yet I have fac'd it with a card of ten.
'Tis in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but suppos'd Lucentio
Must get a father, call'd suppos'd Vincentio;
And that's a wonder- fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word.
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
But, say, what to thine old news?
'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes lie goes but mean-apparell'd.
Not so well apparell'd
As I wish you were.
And tell us what occasion of import
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
See not your bride in these unreverent robes;
Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.
But to her love concerneth us to ad
Her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
As I before imparted to your worship,
I am to get a man- whate'er he be
It skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
That by degrees we mean to look into
And watch our vantage in this business;
We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Licio-
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
                       Re-enter GREMIO
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
Curster than she? Why, 'tis impossible.
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
What said the wench, when he rose again?
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
Of all mad matches, never was the like.
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?
Is 't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca;
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her though she would entreat;
Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
Mistress, we have.
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
That shall be woo'd and wedded in a day.
Ay, and he'll tame her.
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
Ay, mistress; and Petruchio is the master,
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
                   Enter BIONDELLO
What is he, Biondello?
If he be credulous and trust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola
As if he were the right Vincentio.
Take in your love, and then let me alone.
                                  Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA
                     Enter a PEDANT
And you, sir; you are welcome.
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
What countryman, I pray?
Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid,
And come to Padua, careless of your life!
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stay'd at Venice; and the Duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your Duke and him,
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly.
'Tis marvel- but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaim'd about.
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you-
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
Among them know you one Vincentio?
He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
To save your life in this extremity,
This favour will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of all your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodg'd;
Look that you take upon you as you should.
You understand me, sir. So shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city.
If this be court'sy, sir, accept of it.
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This, by the way, I let you understand:
My father is here look'd for every day
To pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here.
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you.
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.              Exeunt
Sir, this is the house; please it you that I call?
'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
With such austerity as longeth to a father.
                   Enter BIONDELLO
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
Th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.
             Enter BAPTISTA, and LUCENTIO as CAMBIO
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
[To To the PEDANT] Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of;
I pray you stand good father to me now;
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
We be affied, and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?
Then at my lodging, an it like you.
There doth my father lie; and there this night
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here;
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that at so slender warning
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
                                              Exit BIONDELLO
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer;
Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
How now! what's the matter?
Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but
your words show you a madman. Why, sir, what 'cerns it you if I
wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father, I am able to
maintain it.
Call forth an officer.
                  Enter one with an OFFICER
Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista, I charge you
see that he be forthcoming.
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.
O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
Which runs himself, and catches for his master.
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself;
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
