Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us:
The Volsces are in arms.
Then, worthy Marcius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
Your company to th' Capitol; where, I know,
Our greatest friends attend us.
 [To the Citizens]  Hence to your homes; be gone.
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are ent'red in our counsels
And know how we proceed.
Our army's in the field;
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.
Farewell.
No, nor a man that fears you less than he:
That's lesser than a little.  [Drum afar off]  Hark, our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls
Rather than they shall pound us up; our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we have but pinn'd with rushes;
They'll open of themselves.  [Alarum far off]  Hark you far off!
There is Aufidius. List what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.
Speak, good Cominius.
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital
Than we to stretch it out. Masters o' th' people,
We do request your kindest ears; and, after,
Your loving motion toward the common body,
To yield what passes here.
Sit, Coriolanus, never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.
Call Coriolanus.
OFFICER. He doth appear.
                        Re-enter CORIOLANUS
Tribunes, give way: he shall to th' market-place.
Not in this heat, sir, now.
No more words, we beseech you.
To unbuild the city, and to lay all flat.
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.
Noble Tribunes,
It is the humane way; the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.
Pray you let's to him.                   Exeunt
There's no remedy,
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst and perish.
Amen, amen!
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them.
Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
