What says my bully rook? Speak scholarly and
wisely.
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier; let them wag; trot,
trot.
Thou'rt an emperor-Caesar, Keiser, and Pheazar. I
will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall tap; said I
well, bully Hector?
I have spoke; let him follow.  [To BARDOLPH]  Let me
see thee froth and lime. I am at a word; follow.   Exit HOST
How now, bully rook! Thou'rt a gentleman.  [To
SHALLOW following]  Cavaleiro Justice, I say.
                     Enter SHALLOW
Tell him, Cavaleiro Justice; tell him, bully rook.
What say'st thou, my bully rook?         [They go aside]
Hast thou no suit against my knight, my guest-cavaleiro.
My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress-
said I well?-and thy name shall be Brook. It is a merry
knight. Will you go, Mynheers?
Here, boys, here, here! Shall we wag?
Bless thee, bully doctor!
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee traverse;
to see thee here, to see thee there; to see thee pass thy
punto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy distance, thy montant.
Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Francisco? Ha,
bully! What says my Aesculapius? my Galen? my heart
of elder? Ha! is he dead, bully stale? Is he dead?
Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of Greece,
my boy!
Pardon, Guest Justice. A word, Mounseur Mockwater.
Mockwater, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
That is, he will make thee amends.
And I will provoke him to't, or let him wag.
And, moreover, bully-but first:  [Aside to the others]
Master Guest, and Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender,
go you through the town to Frogmore.
 [Aside]  He is there. See what humour he is in; and
I will bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?
Let him die. Sheathe thy impatience; throw cold water
on thy choler; go about the fields with me through Frogmore;
I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page is, at a a
farm-house, a-feasting; and thou shalt woo her. Cried
game! Said I well?
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
Page. Said I well?
Let us wag, then.
Disarm them, and let them question; let them keep
their limbs whole and hack our English.
Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,
soul-curer and body-curer.
Peace, I say. Hear mine host of the Garter. Am I
politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I lose my
doctor? No; he gives me the potions and the motions. Shall I
lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? No; he gives me
the proverbs and the noverbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial;
so. Give me thy hand, celestial; so. Boys of art, I have
deceiv'd you both; I have directed you to wrong places;
your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt
sack be the issue. Come, lay their swords to pawn. Follow
me, lads of peace; follow, follow, follow.
What say you to young Master Fenton? He capers,
he dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he speaks
holiday, he smells April and May; he will carry 't, he will
carry 't; 'tis in his buttons; he will carry 't.
Farewell, my hearts; I will to my honest knight
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.               Exit HOST
What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear
not of him in the court. Let me speak with the gentlemen;
they speak English?
They shall have my horses, but I'll make them pay;
I'll sauce them; they have had my house a week at
command; I have turn'd away my other guests. They must
come off; I'll sauce them. Come.                      Exeunt
What wouldst thou have, boor? What, thick-skin?
Speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.
There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his
standing-bed and truckle-bed; 'tis painted about with the
story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go, knock and can; he'll
speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee. Knock, I say.
Ha! a fat woman? The knight may be robb'd. I'll call.
Bully knight! Bully Sir John! Speak from thy lungs
military. Art thou there? It is thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of
thy fat woman. Let her descend, bully, let her descend;
my chambers are honourible. Fie, privacy, fie!
                Enter FALSTAFF
Ay, come; quick.
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was
there a wise woman with thee?
Where be my horses? Speak well of them, varletto.
They are gone but to meet the Duke, villain; do not
say they be fled. Germans are honest men.
             Enter SIR HUGH EVANS
What is the matter, sir?
Here, Master Doctor, in perplexity and doubtful
dilemma.
Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight; I am
undone. Fly, run, hue and cry, villain; I am undone.
                                    Exeunt HOST and BARDOLPH
Master Fenton, talk not to me; my mind is heavy; I
will give over all.
I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will, at the least,
keep your counsel.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
Well, husband your device; I'll to the vicar.
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
