Caesar and Lepidus
Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.
From Silvius, sir.
I cannot hope
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
His wife that's dead did trespasses to Caesar;
His brother warr'd upon him; although, I think,
Not mov'd by Antony.
[Aside] Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have made this
treaty.- You and I have known, sir.
We have, sir.
And you by land.
Nor what I have done by water.
And you by land.
All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.
No slander: they steal hearts.
For my part, I am sorry it is turn'd to a drinking.
Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
Y'have said, sir. We look'd not for Mark Antony here. Pray
you, is he married to Cleopatra?
True, sir; she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
Pray ye, sir?
Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage
than the love of the parties.
Who would not have his wife so?
And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard? I have a
health for you.
Come, let's away.                                Exeunt
                       SCENE VII.
         On board POMPEY'S galley, off Misenum
 Music plays. Enter two or three SERVANTS with a banquet
[Aside to POMPEY] Pompey, a word.
[Aside to POMPEY] Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee,
  Captain,
And hear me speak a word.
[Aside to POMPEY] If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear
  me,
Rise from thy stool.
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.
But entertain it,
And though you think me poor, I am the man
Will give thee all the world.
No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly Jove;
Whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips
Is thine, if thou wilt ha't.
These three world-sharers, these competitors,
Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable;
And when we are put off, fall to their throats.
All there is thine.
[Aside] For this,
I'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more.
Who seeks, and will not take when once 'tis offer'd,
Shall never find it more.
Enobarbus, welcome!
Why?
The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,
That it might go on wheels!
Come.
No, to my cabin.
These drums! these trumpets, flutes! what!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
To these great fellows. Sound and be hang'd, sound out!
                              [Sound a flourish, with drums]
Hoo! Noble Captain, come.                        Exeunt
                 ACT III. SCENE I.
                 A plain in Syria
   Enter VENTIDIUS, as it were in triumph, with SILIUS
  and other Romans, OFFICERS and soldiers; the dead body
            of PACORUS borne before him
