Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Peering in maps for ports, and piers, and roads;
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt,
Would make me sad.
Why then you are in love.
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry,
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus,
Nature hath fram'd strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
And laugh like parrots at a bag-piper;
And other of such vinegar aspect
That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
           Enter BASSANIO, LORENZO, and GRATIANO
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano and Lorenzo. Fare ye well;
We leave you now with better company.
'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered;
And better in my mind not undertook.
And so will I.
The villain Jew with outcries rais'd the Duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.
I never heard a passion so confus'd,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
'My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter!
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
Justice! the law! My ducats and my daughter!
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter!
And jewels- two stones, two rich and precious stones,
Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl;
She hath the stones upon her and the ducats.'
Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
Or he shall pay for this.
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear;
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
I think he only loves the world for him.
I pray thee, let us go and find him out,
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.
Now, what news on the Rialto?
I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapp'd
ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a
third husband. But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or
crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the
honest Antonio- O that I had a title good enough to keep his name
company!-
Ha! What sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath lost a
ship.
Let me say amen betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer,
for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.
                         Enter SHYLOCK
How now, Shylock? What news among the merchants?
And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was flidge;
and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.
Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?
Here comes another of the tribe; a third cannot be
match'd, unless the devil himself turn Jew.
                            Exeunt SOLANIO, SALERIO, and MAN
It is the most impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.
I am sure the Duke
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.
