[aside] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
[aside] Then poor Cordelia!
 And yet not so; since I am sure my love's
 More richer than my tongue.
Nothing, my lord.
Nothing.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
 My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty
 According to my bond; no more nor less.
Good my lord,
 You have begot me, bred me, lov'd me; I
 Return those duties back as are right fit,
 Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
 Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
 They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
 That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
 Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
 Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
 To love my father all.
Ay, good my lord.
So young, my lord, and true.
I yet beseech your Majesty,
 If for I want that glib and oily art
 To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend,
 I'll do't before I speak- that you make known
 It is no vicious blot, murther, or foulness,
 No unchaste action or dishonoured step,
 That hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour;
 But even for want of that for which I am richer-
 A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
 As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
 Hath lost me in your liking.
Peace be with Burgundy!
 Since that respects of fortune are his love,
 I shall not be his wife.
The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
 Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are;
 And, like a sister, am most loath to call
 Your faults as they are nam'd. Use well our father.
 To your professed bosoms I commit him;
 But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
 I would prefer him to a better place!
 So farewell to you both.
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides.
 Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
 Well may you prosper!
Alack, 'tis he! Why, he was met even now
 As mad as the vex'd sea, singing aloud,
 Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow weeds,
 With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo flow'rs,
 Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
 In our sustaining corn. A century send forth.
 Search every acre in the high-grown field
 And bring him to our eye. [Exit an Officer.] What can man's
    wisdom
 In the restoring his bereaved sense?
 He that helps him take all my outward worth.
All blest secrets,
 All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,
 Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate
 In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him!
 Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
 That wants the means to lead it.
                       Enter Messenger.
'Tis known before. Our preparation stands
 In expectation of them. O dear father,
 It is thy business that I go about.
 Therefore great France
 My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
 No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
 But love, dear love, and our ag'd father's right.
 Soon may I hear and see him!
                                                     Exeunt.
O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
 To match thy goodness? My life will be too short
 And every measure fail me.
Be better suited.
 These weeds are memories of those worser hours.
 I prithee put them off.
Then be't so, my good lord. [To the Doctor] How, does the King?
O you kind gods,
 Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
 Th' untun'd and jarring senses, O, wind up
 Of this child-changed father!
Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed
 I' th' sway of your own will. Is he array'd?
          Enter Lear in a chair carried by Servants.
Very well.
                                                      Music.
O my dear father, restoration hang
 Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
 Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
 Have in thy reverence made!
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
 Had challeng'd pity of them. Was this a face
 To be oppos'd against the warring winds?
 To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
 In the most terrible and nimble stroke
 Of quick cross lightning? to watch- poor perdu!-
 With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
 Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
 Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
 To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
 In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
 'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
 Had not concluded all.- He wakes. Speak to him.
How does my royal lord? How fares your Majesty?
Sir, do you know me?
Still, still, far wide!
O, look upon me, sir,
 And hold your hands in benediction o'er me.
 No, sir, you must not kneel.
And so I am! I am!
No cause, no cause.
Will't please your Highness walk?
We are not the first
 Who with best meaning have incurr'd the worst.
 For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
 Myself could else outfrown false Fortune's frown.
 Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
