The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;
it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to man, and
signifies love.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Yes, py'r lady! If he has a quarter of your coat, there
is but three skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures;
but that is all one. If Sir John Falstaff have committed
disparagements unto you, I am of the church, and will be
glad to do my benevolence, to make atonements and
compremises between you.
It is not meet the Council hear a riot; there is no
fear of Got in a riot; the Council, look you, shall desire
to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a riot; take your
vizaments in that.
It is petter that friends is the sword and end it;
and there is also another device in my prain, which
peradventure prings goot discretions with it. There is Anne
Page, which is daughter to Master George Page, which is
pretty virginity.
It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as you
will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and
gold, and silver, is her grandsire upon his death's-bed-Got
deliver to a joyful resurrections!-give, when she is able to
overtake seventeen years old. It were a goot motion if we
leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage
between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.
Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do
despise one that is false; or as I despise one that is not
true. The knight Sir John is there; and, I beseech you, be
ruled by your well-willers. I will peat the door for Master
Page.
[Knocks]  What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your
likings.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
three umpires in this matter, as I understand: that is,
Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is myself,
fidelicet myself; and the three party is, lastly and
finally, mine host of the Garter.
Fery goot. I will make a prief of it in my note-book;
and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great
discreetly as we can.
The tevil and his tam! What phrase is this, 'He hears
with ear'? Why, it is affectations.
No, it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
It is his five senses; fie, what the ignorance is!
So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
Give ear to his motions: Master Slender, I will
description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
But that is not the question. The question is
concerning your marriage.
Marry is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne
Page.
But can you affection the oman? Let us command to
know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers philosophers
hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth. Therefore,
precisely, can you carry your good will to the maid?
Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak possitable,
if you can carry her your desires towards her.
It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the
ord 'dissolutely': the ort is, according to our meaning,
'resolutely'; his meaning is good.
Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
                                    Exeunt SHALLOW and EVANS
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which
is the way; and there dwells one Mistress Quickly, which
is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry nurse, or his cook,
or his laundry, his washer, and his wringer.
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it is a
oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne
Page; and the letter is to desire and require her to solicit
your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page. I pray you
be gone. I will make an end of my dinner; there's pippins
and cheese to come.                                   Exeunt
I pray you now, good Master Slender's serving-man,
and friend Simple by your name, which way have you
look'd for Master Caius, that calls himself Doctor of
Physic?
I most fehemently desire you you will also look that
way.
Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and trempling
of mind! I shall be glad if he have deceived me. How
melancholies I am! I will knog his urinals about his knave's
costard when I have goot opportunities for the ork. Pless
my soul!                                             [Sings]
To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sings madrigals;
There will we make our peds of roses,
And a thousand fragrant posies.
To shallow-
Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.     [Sings]
Melodious birds sing madrigals-
Whenas I sat in Pabylon-
And a thousand vagram posies.
To shallow, etc.
                   Re-enter SIMPLE
He's welcome.                                   [Sings]
To shallow rivers, to whose falls-
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
Pray you give me my gown; or else keep it in your
arms.                                     [Takes out a book]
           Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
Pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!
There is reasons and causes for it.
Fery well; what is it?
What is he?
Got's will and his passion of my heart! I had as lief
you would tell me of a mess of porridge.
He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and
Galen, and he is a knave besides-a cowardly knave as you
would desires to be acquainted withal.
 [Aside to CAIUS]  Pray you use your patience; in
good time.
 [Aside to CAIUS]  Pray you, let us not be
laughing-stocks to other men's humours; I desire you in
friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends.
[Aloud]  I will knog your urinals about your knave's cogscomb
for missing your meetings and appointments.
As I am a Christians soul, now, look you, this is the
place appointed. I'll be judgment by mine host of the
Garter.
This is well; he has made us his vlouting-stog. I
desire you that we may be friends; and let us knog our prains
together to be revenge on this same scall, scurvy, cogging
companion, the host of the Garter.
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you follow.
                                                      Exeunt
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
If there be any pody in the house, and in the
chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses, heaven forgive
my sins at the day of judgment!
You suffer for a pad conscience. Your wife is as
honest a omans as I will desires among five thousand, and five
hundred too.
If there is one, I shall make two in the company.
I pray you now, remembrance to-morrow on the
lousy knave, mine host.
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!
                                                      Exeunt
No; Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
William, how many numbers is in nouns?
Peace your tattlings. What is 'fair,' William?
You are a very simplicity oman; I pray you, peace.
What is 'lapis,' William?
And what is 'a stone,' William?
No, it is 'lapis'; I pray you remember in your prain.
That is a good William. What is he, William, that
does lend articles?
Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark: genitivo,
hujus. Well, what is your accusative case?
I pray you, have your remembrance, child.
Accusativo, hung, hang, hog.
Leave your prabbles, oman. What is the focative
case, William?
Remember, William: focative is caret.
Oman, forbear.
What is your genitive case plural, William?
Ay.
For shame, oman.
Oman, art thou lunatics? Hast thou no understandings
for thy cases, and the numbers of the genders? Thou
art as foolish Christian creatures as I would desires.
Show me now, William, some declensions of your
pronouns.
It is qui, quae, quod; if you forget your qui's, your
quae's, and your quod's, you must be preeches. Go your
ways and play; go.
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.
Why, this is lunatics. This is mad as a mad dog.
'Tis unreasonable. Will you take up your wife's
clothes? Come away.
Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
imaginations of your own heart; this is jealousies.
By yea and no, I think the oman is a witch indeed; I
like not when a oman has a great peard; I spy a great peard
under his muffler.
'Tis one of the best discretions of a oman as ever
did look upon.
You say he has been thrown in the rivers; and has
been grievously peaten as an old oman; methinks there
should be terrors in him, that he should not come;
methinks his flesh is punish'd; he shall have no desires.
I will teach the children their behaviours; and I will
be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the knight with my
taber.
Let us about it. It is admirable pleasures, and fery
honest knaveries.               Exeunt PAGE, FORD, and EVANS
Where is mine host?
Have a care of your entertainments. There is a friend
of mine come to town tells me there is three
cozen-germans that has cozen'd all the hosts of Readins,
of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and money. I tell you for
good will, look you; you are wise, and full of gibes and
vlouting-stogs, and 'tis not convenient you should be
cozened. Fare you well.                                 Exit
              Enter DOCTOR CAIUS
Trib, trib, fairies; come; and remember your parts.
Be pold, I pray you; follow me into the pit; and when I
give the watch-ords, do as I pid you. Come, come; trib,
trib.                                                 Exeunt
Where's Pede? Go you, and where you find a maid
That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy;
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins.
Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set;
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But, stay. I smell a man of middle earth.
Come, will this wood take fire?
         [They put the tapers to his fingers, and he starts]
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires,
and fairies will not pinse you.
And leave you your jealousies too, I pray you.
Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all
putter.
And given to fornications, and to taverns, and sack,
and wine, and metheglins, and to drinkings, and swearings,
and starings, pribbles and prabbles?
