If it be love indeed, tell me how much.
I'll set a bourn how far to be belov'd.
Nay, hear them, Antony.
Fulvia perchance is angry; or who knows
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
His pow'rful mandate to you: 'Do this or this;
Take in that kingdom and enfranchise that;
Perform't, or else we damn thee.'
Perchance? Nay, and most like,
You must not stay here longer; your dismission
Is come from Caesar; therefore hear it, Antony.
Where's Fulvia's process? Caesar's I would say? Both?
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's Queen,
Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesar's homager. Else so thy cheek pays shame
When shrill-tongu'd Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
Excellent falsehood!
Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her?
I'll seem the fool I am not. Antony
Will be himself.
Hear the ambassadors.
Saw you my lord?
Was he not here?
He was dispos'd to mirth; but on the sudden
A Roman thought hath struck him. Enobarbus!
Seek him, and bring him hither. Where's Alexas?
We will not look upon him. Go with us.
                   Exeunt CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, and the rest
Where is he?
See where he is, who's with him, what he does.
I did not send you. If you find him sad,
Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report
That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.        Exit ALEXAS
What should I do I do not?
Thou teachest like a fool- the way to lose him.
I am sick and sullen.
Help me away, dear Charmian; I shall fall.
It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
Will not sustain it.
Pray you, stand farther from me.
I know by that same eye there's some good news.
What says the married woman? You may go.
Would she had never given you leave to come!
Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here-
I have no power upon you; hers you are.
O, never was there queen
So mightily betray'd! Yet at the first
I saw the treasons planted.
Why should I think you can be mine and true,
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
Which break themselves in swearing!
Nay, pray you seek no colour for your going,
But bid farewell, and go. When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words. No going then!
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
Bliss in our brows' bent, none our parts so poor
But was a race of heaven. They are so still,
Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
Art turn'd the greatest liar.
I would I had thy inches. Thou shouldst know
There were a heart in Egypt.
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
 It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?
O most false love!
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fulvia's death how mine receiv'd shall be.
Cut my lace, Charmian, come!
But let it be; I am quickly ill and well-
So Antony loves.
So Fulvia told me.
I prithee turn aside and weep for her;
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Like perfect honour.
You can do better yet; but this is meetly.
And target. Still he mends;
But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.
Courteous lord, one word.
Sir, you and I must part- but that's not it.
Sir, you and I have lov'd- but there's not it.
That you know well. Something it is I would-
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
And I am all forgotten!
'Tis sweating labour
To bear such idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me;
Since my becomings kill me when they do not
Eye well to you. Your honour calls you hence;
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,
And all the gods go with you! Upon your sword
Sit laurel victory, and smooth success
Be strew'd before your feet!
Charmian!
Ha, ha!
Give me to drink mandragora.
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
My Antony is away.
O, 'tis treason!
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
Not now to hear thee sing; I take no pleasure
In aught an eunuch has. 'Tis well for thee
That, being unseminar'd, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
Indeed?
O Charmian,
Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he or sits he?
Or does he walk? or is he on his horse?
O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse; for wot'st thou whom thou mov'st?
The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
And burgonet of men. He's speaking now,
Or murmuring 'Where's my serpent of old Nile?'
For so he calls me. Now I feed myself
With most delicious poison. Think on me,
That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
A morsel for a monarch; and great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;
There would he anchor his aspect and die
With looking on his life.
                     Enter ALEXAS
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
Yet, coming from him, that great med'cine hath
With his tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
What, was he sad or merry?
O well-divided disposition! Note him,
Note him, good Charmian; 'tis the man; but note him!
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
Which seem'd to tell them his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy; but between both.
O heavenly mingle! Be'st thou sad or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man else. Met'st thou my posts?
Who's born that day
When I forget to send to Antony
Shall die a beggar. Ink and paper, Charmian.
Welcome, my good Alexas. Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so?
Be chok'd with such another emphasis!
Say 'the brave Antony.'
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth
If thou with Caesar paragon again
My man of men.
My salad days,
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
To say as I said then. But come, away!
Get me ink and paper.
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Or I'll unpeople Egypt.                               Exeunt
Give me some music- music, moody food
Of us that trade in love.
Let it alone! Let's to billiards. Come, Charmian.
As well a woman with an eunuch play'd
As with a woman. Come, you'll play with me, sir?
And when good will is show'd, though't come too short,
The actor may plead pardon. I'll none now.
Give me mine angle- we'll to th' river. There,
My music playing far off, I will betray
Tawny-finn'd fishes; my bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws; and as I draw them up
I'll think them every one an Antony,
And say 'Ah ha! Y'are caught.'
That time? O times
I laughed him out of patience; and that night
I laugh'd him into patience; and next morn,
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
I wore his sword Philippan.
                Enter a MESSENGER
O! from Italy?
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.
Antony's dead! If thou say so, villain,
Thou kill'st thy mistress; but well and free,
If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
My bluest veins to kiss- a hand that kings
Have lipp'd, and trembled kissing.
Why, there's more gold.
But, sirrah, mark, we use
To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat.
Well, go to, I will.
But there's no goodness in thy face. If Antony
Be free and healthful- why so tart a favour
To trumpet such good tidings? If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crown'd with snakes,
Not like a formal man.
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st.
Yet, if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him,
I'll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
Rich pearls upon thee.
Well said.
Th'art an honest man.
Make thee a fortune from me.
I do not like 'but yet.' It does allay
The good precedence; fie upon 'but yet'!
'But yet' is as a gaoler to bring forth
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together. He's friends with Caesar;
In state of health, thou say'st; and, thou say'st, free.
For what good turn?
I am pale, Charmian.
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
                                          [Strikes him down]
What say you? Hence,                  [Strikes him]
Horrible villain! or I'll spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me; I'll unhair thy head;
                                 [She hales him up and down]
Thou shalt be whipp'd with wire and stew'd in brine,
Smarting in ling'ring pickle.
Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee,
And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage;
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.
Rogue, thou hast liv'd too long.    [Draws a knife]
Some innocents scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile! and kindly creatures
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!
I will not hurt him.
These hands do lack nobility, that they strike
A meaner than myself; since I myself
Have given myself the cause.
                Enter the MESSENGER again
Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message
An host of tongues; but let ill tidings tell
Themselves when they be felt.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do
If thou again say 'Yes.'
The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?
O, I would thou didst,
So half my Egypt were submerg'd and made
A cistern for scal'd snakes! Go, get thee hence.
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?
He is married?
O, that his fault should make a knave of thee
That art not what th'art sure of! Get thee hence.
The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome
Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,
And be undone by 'em!                         Exit MESSENGER
In praising Antony I have disprais'd Caesar.
I am paid for't now. Lead me from hence,
I faint. O Iras, Charmian! 'Tis no matter.
Go to the fellow, good Alexas; bid him
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination; let him not leave out
The colour of her hair. Bring me word quickly.
                                                 Exit ALEXAS
Let him for ever go- let him not, Charmian-
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other way's a Mars.                         [To MARDIAN]
Bid you Alexas
Bring me word how tall she is.- Pity me, Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.        Exeunt
Where is the fellow?
Go to, go to.
            Enter the MESSENGER as before
Come hither, sir.
That Herod's head
I'll have. But how, when Antony is gone,
Through whom I might command it? Come thou near.
Didst thou behold Octavia?
Where?
Is she as tall as me?
Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongu'd or low?
That's not so good. He cannot like her long.
I think so, Charmian. Dull of tongue and dwarfish!
What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
If e'er thou look'dst on majesty.
Is this certain?
He's very knowing;
I do perceive't. There's nothing in her yet.
The fellow has good judgment.
Guess at her years, I prithee.
Widow? Charmian, hark!
Bear'st thou her face in mind? Is't long or round?
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
Her hair, what colour?
There's gold for thee.
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
I will employ thee back again; I find thee
Most fit for business. Go make thee ready;
Our letters are prepar'd.                   Exeunt MESSENGER
Indeed, he is so. I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
This creature's no such thing.
The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian.
But 'tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me
Where I will write. All may be well enough.
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars,
And say'st it is not fit.
Is't not denounc'd against us? Why should not we
Be there in person?
What is't you say?
Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against us! A charge we bear i' th' war,
And, as the president of my kingdom, will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it;
I will not stay behind.
               Enter ANTONY and CANIDIUS
Celerity is never more admir'd
Than by the negligent.
By sea! What else?
I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.
Let me sit down. O Juno!
Ah, stand by!
Well then, sustain me. O!
Her head's declin'd, and death will seize her but
Your comfort makes the rescue.
O my lord, my lord,
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
You would have followed.
O, my pardon!
Pardon, pardon!
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Is Antony or we in fault for this?
Prithee, peace.
      Enter EUPHRONIUS, the Ambassador; with ANTONY
That head, my lord?
What, no more ceremony? See, my women!
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
That kneel'd unto the buds. Admit him, sir.     Exit SERVANT
Caesar's will?
None but friends: say boldly.
Go on. Right royal!
O!
He is a god, and knows
What is most right. Mine honour was not yielded,
But conquer'd merely.
What's your name?
Most kind messenger,
Say to great Caesar this: in deputation
I kiss his conquring hand. Tell him I am prompt
To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel.
Tell him from his all-obeying breath I hear
The doom of Egypt.
Your Caesar's father oft,
When he hath mus'd of taking kingdoms in,
Bestow'd his lips on that unworthy place,
As it rain'd kisses.
            Re-enter ANTONY and ENOBARBUS
Good my lord-
O, is't come to this?
Wherefore is this?
Have you done yet?
I must stay his time.
Not know me yet?
Ah, dear, if I be so,
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail,
And poison it in the source, and the first stone
Drop in my neck; as it determines, so
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite!
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm,
Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
Have buried them for prey.
That's my brave lord!
It is my birthday.
I had thought t'have held it poor; but since my lord
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.
Call all his noble captains to my lord.
[Aside to ENOBARBUS] What means this?
[Aside to ENOBARBUS] What does he mean?
ENOBARBUS. [Aside to CLEOPATRA] To make his followers weep.
Sleep a little.
Nay, I'll help too.
What's this for?
Sooth, la, I'll help. Thus it must be.
Is not this buckled well?
Lead me.
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
Determine this great war in single fight!
Then, Antony- but now. Well, on.                      Exeunt
                      SCENE V.
              Alexandria. ANTONY'S camp
    Trumpets sound. Enter ANTONY and EROS, a SOLDIER
                   meeting them
Lord of lords!
O infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from
The world's great snare uncaught?
I'll give thee, friend,
An armour all of gold; it was a king's.
Why is my lord enrag'd against his love?
Help me, my women. O, he is more mad
Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
Was never so emboss'd.
To th' monument!
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself;
Say that the last I spoke was 'Antony'
And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death. To th' monument!
                                                      Exeunt
                      SCENE XIV.
                 CLEOPATRA'S palace
               Enter ANTONY and EROS
O Charmian, I will never go from hence!
No, I will not.
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise; our size of sorrow,
Proportion'd to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.
               Enter DIOMEDES, below
How now! Is he dead?
O sun,
Burn the great sphere thou mov'st in! Darkling stand
The varying shore o' th' world. O Antony,
Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian; help, Iras, help;
Help, friends below! Let's draw him hither.
So it should be, that none but Antony
Should conquer Antony; but woe 'tis so!
I dare not, dear.
Dear my lord, pardon! I dare not,
Lest I be taken. Not th' imperious show
Of the full-fortun'd Caesar ever shall
Be brooch'd with me. If knife, drugs, serpents, have
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.
Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
And still conclusion, shall acquire no honour
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony-
Help me, my women- we must draw thee up;
Assist, good friends.
Here's sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord!
Our strength is all gone into heaviness;
That makes the weight. Had I great Juno's power,
The strong-wing'd Mercury should fetch thee up,
And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little.
Wishers were ever fools. O come, come,
                      [They heave ANTONY aloft to CLEOPATRA]
And welcome, welcome! Die where thou hast liv'd.
Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.
No, let me speak; and let me rail so high
That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
Provok'd by my offence.
They do not go together.
My resolution and my hands I'll trust;
None about Caesar
Noblest of men, woo't die?
Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better than a sty? O, see, my women,        [Antony dies]
The crown o' th' earth doth melt. My lord!
O, wither'd is the garland of the war,
The soldier's pole is fall'n! Young boys and girls
Are level now with men. The odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.                          [Swoons]
No more but e'en a woman, and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
To throw my sceptre at the injurious gods;
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
Till they had stol'n our jewel. All's but nought;
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a dog that's mad. Then is it sin
To rush into the secret house of death
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
What, what! good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian!
My noble girls! Ah, women, women, look,
Our lamp is spent, it's out! Good sirs, take heart.
We'll bury him; and then, what's brave, what's noble,
Let's do it after the high Roman fashion,
And make death proud to take us. Come, away;
This case of that huge spirit now is cold.
Ah, women, women! Come; we have no friend
But resolution and the briefest end.
               Exeunt; those above hearing off ANTONY'S body
                   ACT V. SCENE I.
              Alexandria. CAESAR'S camp
  Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, MAECENAS, GALLUS,
      PROCULEIUS, and others, his Council of War
My desolation does begin to make
A better life. 'Tis paltry to be Caesar:
Not being Fortune, he's but Fortune's knave,
A minister of her will; and it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,
Which sleeps, and never palates more the dug,
The beggar's nurse and Caesar's.
   Enter, to the gates of the monument, PROCULEIUS, GALLUS,
                      and soldiers
What's thy name?
Antony
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you; but
I do not greatly care to be deceiv'd,
That have no use for trusting. If your master
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
No less beg than a kingdom. If he please
To give me conquer'd Egypt for my son,
He gives me so much of mine own as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.
Pray you tell him
I am his fortune's vassal and I send him
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly
Look him i' th' face.
Quick, quick, good hands.        [Drawing a dagger]
What, of death too,
That rids our dogs of languish?
Where art thou, death?
Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
Worth many babes and beggars!
Sir, I will eat no meat; I'll not drink, sir;
If idle talk will once be necessary,
I'll not sleep neither. This mortal house I'll ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
Will not wait pinion'd at your master's court,
Nor once be chastis'd with the sober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up,
And show me to the shouting varletry
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
Be gentle grave unto me! Rather on Nilus' mud
Lay me stark-nak'd, and let the water-flies
Blow me into abhorring! Rather make
My country's high pyramides my gibbet,
And hang me up in chains!
Say I would die.
                              Exeunt PROCULEIUS and soldiers
I cannot tell.
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
Is't not your trick?
I dreamt there was an Emperor Antony-
O, such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man!
His face was as the heav'ns, and therein stuck
A sun and moon, which kept their course and lighted
The little O, the earth.
His legs bestrid the ocean; his rear'd arm
Crested the world. His voice was propertied
As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
There was no winter in't; an autumn 'twas
That grew the more by reaping. His delights
Were dolphin-like: they show'd his back above
The element they liv'd in. In his livery
Walk'd crowns and crownets; realms and islands were
As plates dropp'd from his pocket.
Think you there was or might be such a man
As this I dreamt of?
You lie, up to the hearing of the gods.
But if there be nor ever were one such,
It's past the size of drearning. Nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy; yet t' imagine
An Antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.
I thank you, sir.
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
Nay, pray you, sir.
He'll lead me, then, in triumph?
Sir, the gods
Will have it thus; my master and my lord
I must obey.
Sole sir o' th' world,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties which before
Have often sham'd our sex.
And may, through all the world. 'Tis yours, and we,
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels,
I am possess'd of. 'Tis exactly valued,
Not petty things admitted. Where's Seleucus?
This is my treasurer; let him speak, my lord,
Upon his peril, that I have reserv'd
To myself nothing. Speak the truth, Seleucus.
What have I kept back?
See, Caesar! O, behold,
How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours;
And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
Even make me wild. O slave, of no more trust
Than love that's hir'd! What, goest thou back? Thou shalt
Go back, I warrant thee; but I'll catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!
O rarely base!
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the honour of thy lordliness
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
That I some lady trifles have reserv'd,
Immoment toys, things of such dignity
As we greet modern friends withal; and say
Some nobler token I have kept apart
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
Their mediation- must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me
Beneath the fall I have. [To SELEUCUS] Prithee go hence;
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Through th' ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
For things that others do; and when we fall
We answer others' merits in our name,
Are therefore to be pitied.
My master and my lord!
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian!
                                         [Whispers CHARMIAN]
Hie thee again.
I have spoke already, and it is provided;
Go put it to the haste.
Dolabella!
Dolabella,
I shall remain your debtor.
Farewell, and thanks.                Exit DOLABELLA
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou an Egyptian puppet shall be shown
In Rome as well as I. Mechanic slaves,
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers, shall
Uplift us to the view; in their thick breaths,
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded,
And forc'd to drink their vapour.
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors
Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
Ballad us out o' tune; the quick comedians
Extemporally will stage us, and present
Our Alexandrian revels; Antony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
I' th' posture of a whore.
Nay, that's certain.
Why, that's the way
To fool their preparation and to conquer
Their most absurd intents.
                  Enter CHARMIAN
Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch
My best attires. I am again for Cydnus,
To meet Mark Antony. Sirrah, Iras, go.
Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed;
And when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee leave
To play till doomsday. Bring our crown and all.
                                   Exit IRAS. A noise within
Wherefore's this noise?
                 Enter a GUARDSMAN
Let him come in.                     Exit GUARDSMAN
What poor an instrument
May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty.
My resolution's plac'd, and I have nothing
Of woman in me. Now from head to foot
I am marble-constant; now the fleeting moon
No planet is of mine.
      Re-enter GUARDSMAN and CLOWN, with a basket
Avoid, and leave him.                Exit GUARDSMAN
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
That kills and pains not?
Remember'st thou any that have died on't?
Get thee hence; farewell.
Farewell.
Ay, ay; farewell.
Take thou no care; it shall be heeded.
Will it eat me?
Well, get thee gone; farewell.
Give me my robe, put on my crown; I have
Immortal longings in me. Now no more
The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras; quick. Methinks I hear
Antony call. I see him rouse himself
To praise my noble act. I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come.
Now to that name my courage prove my title!
I am fire and air; my other elements
I give to baser life. So, have you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian. Iras, long farewell.
                          [Kisses them. IRAS falls and dies]
Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thus thou and nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch,
Which hurts and is desir'd. Dost thou lie still?
If thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
It is not worth leave-taking.
This proves me base.
If she first meet the curled Antony,
He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have. Come, thou mortal wretch,
                [To an asp, which she applies to her breast]
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool,
Be angry and dispatch. O couldst thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
Unpolicied!
Peace, peace!
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast
That sucks the nurse asleep?
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle-
O Antony! Nay, I will take thee too:
                           [Applying another asp to her arm]
What should I stay-                                   [Dies]
