I would there were no age between ten and three and
twenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest; for there is
nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging
the ancientry, stealing, fighting-  [Horns]  Hark you now! Would
any but these boil'd brains of nineteen and two and twenty hunt
this weather? They have scar'd away two of my best sheep, which I
fear the wolf will sooner find than the master. If any where I
have them, 'tis by the sea-side, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't
be thy will! What have we here?  [Taking up the child]  Mercy
on's, a barne! A very pretty barne. A boy or a child, I wonder? A
pretty one; a very pretty one- sure, some scape. Though I am not
bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the scape. This
has been some stair-work, some trunk-work, some behind-door-work;
they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here. I'll
take it up for pity; yet I'll tarry till my son come; he halloo'd
but even now. Whoa-ho-hoa!
                      Enter CLOWN
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk on when
thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What ail'st thou, man?
Why, boy, how is it?
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
Would I had been by to have help'd the old man!
Heavy matters, heavy matters! But look thee here, boy.
Now bless thyself; thou met'st with things dying, I with things
new-born. Here's a sight for thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for
a squire's child! Look thee here; take up, take up, boy; open't.
So, let's see- it was told me I should be rich by the fairies.
This is some changeling. Open't. What's within, boy?
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so. Up with't,
keep it close. Home, home, the next way! We are lucky, boy; and
to be so still requires nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go.
Come, good boy, the next way home.
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that which
is left of him what he is, fetch me to th' sight of him.
'Tis a lucky day, boy; and we'll do good deeds on't.
                                                      Exeunt
Fie, daughter! When my old wife liv'd, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook;
Both dame and servant; welcom'd all; serv'd all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here
At upper end o' th' table, now i' th' middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
With labour, and the thing she took to quench it
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one, and not
The hostess of the meeting. Pray you bid
These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is
A way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes, and present yourself
That which you are, Mistress o' th' Feast. Come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.
They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding; but I have it
Upon his own report, and I believe it:
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter;
I think so too; for never gaz'd the moon
Upon the water as he'll stand and read,
As 'twere my daughter's eyes; and, to be plain,
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.
So she does any thing; though I report it
That should be silent. If young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.
                  Enter a SERVANT
Away! We'll none on't; here has been too much homely
foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.
Leave your prating; since these good men are pleas'd, let
them come in; but quickly now.
But, my daughter,
Say you the like to him?
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to't:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her portion equal his.
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.
Let him, my son; he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.
O, my heart!
I cannot speak nor think,
Nor dare to know that which I know.  [To FLORIZEL]  O sir,
You have undone a man of fourscore-three
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones; but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust. [To PERDITA] O cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was the Prince, and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him!- Undone, undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have liv'd
To die when I desire.                                   Exit
Nay, but hear me.
Go to, then.
I will tell the King all, every word- yea, and his son's
pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his
father nor to me, to go about to make me the King's
brother-in-law.
Well, let us to the King. There is that in this fardel
will make him scratch his beard.
To th' palace, an it like your worship.
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
My business, sir, is to the King.
I know not, an't like you.
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
His garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box which
none must know but the King; and which he shall know within this
hour, if I may come to th' speech of him.
Why, Sir?
So 'tis said, sir- about his son, that should have
married a shepherd's daughter.
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for us,
here is that gold I have. I'll make it as much more, and leave
this young man in pawn till I bring it you.
Ay, sir.
Let's before, as he bids us. He was provided to do us
good.                              Exeunt SHEPHERD and CLOWN
Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and
daughters will be all gentlemen born.
And so have I, boy.
We may live, son, to shed many more.
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
gentlemen.
You may say it, but not swear it.
How if it be false, son?
