Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master?
Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already,
And I have play'd the sheep in losing him.
You conclude that my master is a shepherd then, and
I a sheep?
Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.
This proves me still a sheep.
Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.
The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the
shepherd; but I seek my master, and my master seeks not me;
therefore, I am no sheep.
Such another proof will make me cry 'baa.'
Ay, sir; I, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her, a lac'd
mutton; and she, a lac'd mutton, gave me, a lost mutton, nothing
for my labour.
If the ground be overcharg'd, you were best stick her.
Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your
letter.
From a pound to a pin? Fold it over and over,
'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.
 [Nodding]  Ay.
You mistook, sir; I say she did nod; and you ask me if she
did nod; and I say 'Ay.'
Now you have taken the pains to set it together, take it for
your pains.
Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.
Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly; having nothing but the
word 'noddy' for my pains.
And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.
Open your purse, that the money and the matter may be both
at once delivered.
Truly, sir, I think you'll hardly win her.
Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her; no, not so
much as a ducat for delivering your letter; and being so hard to
me that brought your mind, I fear she'll prove as hard to you in
telling your mind. Give her no token but stones, for she's as
hard as steel.
No, not so much as 'Take this for thy pains.' To testify
your bounty, I thank you, you have testern'd me; in requital
whereof, henceforth carry your letters yourself; and so, sir,
I'll commend you to my master.
Sir, your glove.
Why, then, this may be yours; for this is but one.
 [Calling]  Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia!
She is not within hearing, sir.
Your worship, sir; or else I mistook.
And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
She that your worship loves?
Marry, by these special marks: first, you have learn'd, like
Sir Proteus, to wreath your arms like a malcontent; to relish a
love-song, like a robin redbreast; to walk alone, like one that
had the pestilence; to sigh, like a school-boy that had lost his
A B C; to weep, like a young wench that had buried her grandam;
to fast, like one that takes diet; to watch, like one that fears
robbing; to speak puling, like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were
wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walk'd, to
walk like one of the lions; when you fasted, it was presently
after dinner; when you look'd sadly, it was for want of money.
And now you are metamorphis'd with a mistress, that, when I look
on you, I can hardly think you my master.
They are all perceiv'd without ye.
Without you! Nay, that's certain; for, without you were so
simple, none else would; but you are so without these follies
that these follies are within you, and shine through you like the
water in an urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a
physician to comment on your malady.
She that you gaze on so, as she sits at supper?
Why, sir, I know her not.
Is she not hard-favour'd, sir?
Sir, I know that well enough.
That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favour'd.
That's because the one is painted, and the other out of all
count.
Marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that no man counts
of her beauty.
You never saw her since she was deform'd.
Ever since you lov'd her.
If you love her, you cannot see her.
Because Love is blind. O that you had mine eyes; or your own
eyes had the lights they were wont to have when you chid at Sir
Proteus for going ungarter'd!
Your own present folly and her passing deformity; for he,
being in love, could not see to garter his hose; and you, being
in love, cannot see to put on your hose.
True, sir; I was in love with my bed. I thank you, you
swing'd me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you
for yours.
I would you were set, so your affection would cease.
And have you?
Are they not lamely writ?
 [Aside]  O excellent motion! O exceeding puppet!
Now will he interpret to her.
 [Aside]  O, give ye good ev'n!
Here's a million of manners.
 [Aside]  He should give her interest, and she gives it him.
 [Aside]  And yet you will; and yet another' yet.'
O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible,
As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple!
My master sues to her; and she hath taught her suitor,
He being her pupil, to become her tutor.
O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better,
That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?
Nay, I was rhyming: 'tis you that have the reason.
To be a spokesman from Madam Silvia?
To yourself; why, she woos you by a figure.
By a letter, I should say.
What need she, when she hath made you write to yourself?
Why, do you not perceive the jest?
No believing you indeed, sir. But did you perceive her
earnest?
Why, she hath given you a letter.
And that letter hath she deliver'd, and there an end.
I'll warrant you 'tis as well.
'For often have you writ to her; and she, in modesty,
Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply;
Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover,
Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.'
All this I speak in print, for in print I found it. Why muse you,
sir? 'Tis dinner time.
Ay, but hearken, sir; though the chameleon Love can feed on
the air, I am one that am nourish'd by my victuals, and would
fain have meat. O, be not like your mistress! Be moved, be moved.
                                                      Exeunt
Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.
Not of you.
'Twere good you knock'd him.                       Exit
Launce! by mine honesty, welcome to Padua.
Come on, you madcap; I'll to the alehouse with you
presently; where, for one shot of five pence, thou shalt have
five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah, how did thy master part with
Madam Julia?
But shall she marry him?
How then? Shall he marry her?
What, are they broken?
Why then, how stands the matter with them?
What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.
What thou say'st?
It stands under thee, indeed.
But tell me true, will't be a match?
The conclusion is, then, that it will.
'Tis well that I get it so. But, Launce, how say'st thou
that my master is become a notable lover?
Than how?
Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistak'st me.
I tell thee my master is become a hot lover.
Why?
At thy service.                                  Exeunt
How now, Signior Launce! What news with your mastership?
Well, your old vice still: mistake the word. What news,
then, in your paper?
Why, man? how black?
Let me read them.
Thou liest; I can.
Marry, the son of my grandfather.
Come, fool, come; try me in thy paper.
 [Reads]  'Inprimis: She can milk.'
'Item: She brews good ale.'
'Item: She can sew.'
'Item: She can knit.'
'Item: She can wash and scour.'
'Item: She can spin.'
'Item: She hath many nameless virtues.'
'Here follow her vices.'
'Item: She is not to be kiss'd fasting, in respect of her
breath.'
'Item: She hath a sweet mouth.'
'Item: She doth talk in her sleep.'
'Item: She is slow in words.'
'Item: She is proud.'
'Item: She hath no teeth.'
'Item: She is curst.'
'Item: She will often praise her liquor.'
'Item: She is too liberal.'
'Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faults
than hairs, and more wealth than faults.'
'Item: She hath more hair than wit'-
'And more faults than hairs'-
'And more wealth than faults.'
What then?
For me?
And must I go to him?
Why didst not tell me sooner? Pox of your love letters!
Sir, we are undone; these are the villains
That all the travellers do fear so much.
Master, be one of them; it's an honourable kind of thievery.
