We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we
shall never see the end of it. Who goes there?
Under what captain serve you?
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman. I pray
you, what thinks he of our estate?
That's more than we know.
But if the cause be not good, the King himself hath a
heavy reckoning to make when all those legs and arms and heads,
chopp'd off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day
and cry all 'We died at such a place'- some swearing, some crying
for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some
upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left. I
am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle; for how
can they charitably dispose of anything when blood is their
argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black
matter for the King that led them to it; who to disobey were
against all proportion of subjection.
'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his
own head- the King is not to answer for it.
Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully; but when our
throats are cut he may be ransom'd, and we ne'er the wiser.
You pay him then! That's a perilous shot out of an
elder-gun, that a poor and a private displeasure can do against a
monarch! You may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with
fanning in his face with a peacock's feather. You'll never trust
his word after! Come, 'tis a foolish saying.
Let it be a quarrel between us if you live.
How shall I know thee again?
Here's my glove; give me another of thine.
This will I also wear in my cap; if ever thou come to me
and say, after to-morrow, 'This is my glove,' by this hand I will
take thee a box on the ear.
Thou dar'st as well be hang'd.
Keep thy word. Fare thee well.
An't please your Majesty, 'tis the gage of one that I
should fight withal, if he be alive.
An't please your Majesty, a rascal that swagger'd with me
last night; who, if 'a live and ever dare to challenge this
glove, I have sworn to take him a box o' th' ear; or if I can see
my glove in his cap- which he swore, as he was a soldier, he
would wear if alive- I will strike it out soundly.
So I Will, my liege, as I live.
Under Captain Gower, my liege.
I will, my liege.                               Exit
I warrant it is to knight you, Captain.
                     Enter FLUELLEN
Sir, know you this glove?
I know this; and thus I challenge it.  [Strikes him]
Do you think I'll be forsworn?
I am no traitor.
My liege, this was my glove: here is the fellow of it;
and he that I gave it to in change promis'd to wear it in his
cap; I promis'd to strike him if he did; I met this man with my
glove in his cap, and I have been as good as my word.
All offences, my lord, come from the heart; never came
any from mine that might offend your Majesty.
Your Majesty came not like yourself: you appear'd to me
but as a common man; witness the night, your garments, your
lowliness; and what your Highness suffer'd under that shape I
beseech you take it for your own fault, and not mine; for had you
been as I took you for, I made no offence; therefore, I beseech
your Highness pardon me.
I will none of your money.
