Ay, madam; so you stumble not unheedfully.
Please you, repeat their names; I'll show my mind
According to my shallow simple skill.
As of a knight well-spoken, neat, and fine;
But, were I you, he never should be mine.
Well of his wealth; but of himself, so so.
Lord, Lord! to see what folly reigns in us!
Pardon, dear madam; 'tis a passing shame
That I, unworthy body as I am,
Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.
Then thus: of many good I think him best.
I have no other but a woman's reason:
I think him so, because I think him so.
Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.
Yet he, of all the rest, I think, best loves ye.
Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
O, they love least that let men know their love.
Peruse this paper, madam.
That the contents will show.
Sir Valentine's page; and sent, I think, from Proteus.
He would have given it you; but I, being in the way,
Did in your name receive it; pardon the fault, I pray.
To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
That you may ruminate.                           Exit
What would your ladyship?
I would it were,
That you might kill your stomach on your meat
And not upon your maid.
Nothing.
To take a paper up that I let fall.
Nothing concerning me.
Madam, it will not lie where it concerns,
Unless it have a false interpreter.
That I might sing it, madam, to a tune.
Give me a note; your ladyship can set.
It is too heavy for so light a tune.
Ay; and melodious were it, would you sing it.
I cannot reach so high.
Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out.
And yet methinks I do not like this tune.
No, madam; 'tis too sharp.
Nay, now you are too flat
And mar the concord with too harsh a descant;
There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.
Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.
She makes it strange; but she would be best pleas'd
To be so ang'red with another letter.                   Exit
Madam,
Dinner is ready, and your father stays.
What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?
Nay, I was taken up for laying them down;
Yet here they shall not lie for catching cold.
Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;
I see things too, although you judge I wink.
Alas, the way is wearisome and long!
Better forbear till Proteus make return.
I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire,
But qualify the fire's extreme rage,
Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
But in what habit will you go along?
Why then, your ladyship must cut your hair.
What fashion, madam, shall I make your breeches?
You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
A round hose, madam, now's not worth a pin,
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
If you think so, then stay at home and go not.
Then never dream on infamy, but go.
If Proteus like your journey when you come,
No matter who's displeas'd when you are gone.
I fear me he will scarce be pleas'd withal.
All these are servants to deceitful men.
Pray heav'n he prove so when you come to him.
