Good morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?
I prithee lend me this lantern to see my gelding in the
stable.
i' faith.
I pray thee lend me thine.
I'll see thee hang'd first!
Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?
Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the gentlemen. They will
along with company, for they have great charge.
                                          Exeunt [Carriers].
What, ho! chamberlain!
                        Enter Chamberlain.
That's even as fair as- 'at hand, quoth the chamberlain'; for
thou variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction
doth from labouring: thou layest the plot how.
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' clerks, I'll
give thee this neck.
What talkest thou to me of the hangman? If I hang, I'll make
a fat pair of gallows; for if I hang, old Sir John hangs with me,
and thou knowest he is no starveling. Tut! there are other
Troyans that thou dream'st not of, the which for sport sake are
content to do the profession some grace; that would (if matters
should be look'd into) for their own credit sake make all whole.
I am joined with no foot land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny
strikers, none of these mad mustachio purple-hued maltworms; but
with nobility, and tranquillity, burgomasters and great oneyers,
such as can hold in, such as will strike sooner than speak, and
speak sooner than drink, and drink sooner than pray; and yet,
zounds, I lie; for they pray continually to their saint, the
commonwealth, or rather, not pray to her, but prey on her, for
they ride up and down on her and make her their boots.
She will, she will! Justice hath liquor'd her. We steal as in
a castle, cocksure. We have the receipt of fernseed, we walk
invisible.
Give me thy hand. Thou shalt have a share in our purchase, as
I and a true man.
Go to; 'homo' is a common name to all men. Bid the ostler
bring my gelding out of the stable. Farewell, you muddy knave.
                                                     Exeunt.
Stand!
There's enough to make us all.
Some eight or ten.
We four set upon some dozen-
And bound them.
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men sea upon us-
