Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all;
  My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours.
  Say that I linger'd with you at your shop
  To see the making of her carcanet,
  And that to-morrow you will bring it home.
  But here's a villain that would face me down
  He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
  And charg'd him with a thousand marks in gold,
  And that I did deny my wife and house.
  Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?
I think thou art an ass.
Y'are sad, Signior Balthazar; pray God our cheer
  May answer my good will and your good welcome here.
O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
  A table full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish.
And welcome more common; for that's nothing
  but words.
Ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest.
  But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
  Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
  But, soft, my door is lock'd; go bid them let us in.
Who talks within there? Ho, open the door!
Wherefore? For my dinner;
    I have not din'd to-day.
What art thou that keep'st me out
    from the house I owe?
Do you hear, you minion? You'll let us in, I hope?
Thou baggage, let me in.
You'll cry for this, minion, if beat the door down.
Are you there, wife? You might
    have come before.
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
Go fetch me something; I'll break ope the gate.
Well, I'll break in; go borrow me a crow.
Go get thee gone; fetch me an iron crow.
You have prevail'd. I will depart in quiet,
  And in despite of mirth mean to be merry.
  I know a wench of excellent discourse,
  Pretty and witty; wild, and yet, too, gentle;
  There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
  My wife-but, I protest, without desert-
  Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal;
  To her will we to dinner.  [To ANGELO]  Get you home
  And fetch the chain; by this I know 'tis made.
  Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine;
  For there's the house. That chain will I bestow-
  Be it for nothing but to spite my wife-
  Upon mine hostess there; good sir, make haste.
  Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
  I'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.
Do so; this jest shall cost me some expense.
While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
  And buy a rope's end; that will I bestow
  Among my wife and her confederates,
  For locking me out of my doors by day.
  But, soft, I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone;
  Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.
A man is well holp up that trusts to you!
  I promised your presence and the chain;
  But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
  Belike you thought our love would last too long,
  If it were chain'd together, and therefore came not.
I am not furnish'd with the present money;
  Besides, I have some business in the town.
  Good signior, take the stranger to my house,
  And with you take the chain, and bid my wife
  Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof.
  Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
No; bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have;
  Or else you may return without your money.
Good Lord! you use this dalliance to excuse
  Your breach of promise to the Porpentine;
  I should have chid you for not bringing it,
  But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath!
  Come, where's the chain? I pray you let me see it.
I answer you! What should I answer you?
I owe you none till I receive the chain.
You gave me none; you wrong me much to say so.
Consent to pay thee that I never had!
  Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar'st.
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
  But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
  As all the metal in your shop will answer.
How now! a madman? Why, thou peevish sheep,
  What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?
THOU drunken slave! I sent the for a rope;
  And told thee to what purpose and what end.
I Will debate this matter at more leisure,
  And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
  To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight;
  Give her this key, and tell her in the desk
  That's cover'd o'er with Turkish tapestry
  There is a purse of ducats; let her send it.
  Tell her I am arrested in the street,
  And that shall bail me; hie thee, slave, be gone.
  On, officer, to prison till it come.
Fear me not, man; I will not break away.
  I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money,
  To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.
  My wife is in a wayward mood to-day,
  And will not lightly trust the messenger.
  That I should be attach'd in Ephesus,
  I tell you 'twill sound harshly in her cars.

Enter DROMIO OF EPHESUS, with a rope's-end

  Here comes my man; I think he brings the money.
  How now, sir! Have you that I sent you for?
But where's the money?
Five hundred ducats, villain, for rope?
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.
[Beating him]
Thou whoreson, senseless villain!
Thou art sensible in nothing but
  blows, and so is an ass.
Come, go along; my wife is coming yonder.
Wilt thou still talk?
[Beating him]
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
[Striking him]
Peace, doting wizard, peace! I am not mad.
You minion, you, are these your customers?
  Did this companion with the saffron face
  Revel and feast it at my house to-day,
  Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,
  And I denied to enter in my house?
Din'd at home! Thou villain, what sayest thou?
Were not my doors lock'd up and I shut out?
And did not she herself revile me there?
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
Thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me.
Went'st not thou to her for purse of ducats?
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day?
  And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
  And art confederate with a damned pack
  To make a loathsome abject scorn of me;
  But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
  That would behold in me this shameful sport.
What, will you murder me? Thou gaoler, thou,
  I am thy prisoner. Wilt thou suffer them
  To make a rescue?
O most unhappy strumpet!
Out on thee, villian! Wherefore
  dost thou mad me?
My liege, I am advised what I say;
  Neither disturbed with the effect of wine,
  Nor heady-rash, provok'd with raging ire,
  Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
  This woman lock'd me out this day from dinner;
  That goldsmith there, were he not pack'd with her,
  Could witness it, for he was with me then;
  Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
  Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
  Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
  Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
  I went to seek him. In the street I met him,
  And in his company that gentleman.
  There did this perjur'd goldsmith swear me down
  That I this day of him receiv'd the chain,
  Which, God he knows, I saw not; for the which
  He did arrest me with an officer.
  I did obey, and sent my peasant home
  For certain ducats; he with none return'd.
  Then fairly I bespoke the officer
  To go in person with me to my house.
  By th' way we met my wife, her sister, and a rabble more
  Of vile confederates. Along with them
  They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-fac'd villain,
  A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
  A threadbare juggler, and a fortune-teller,
  A needy, hollow-ey'd, sharp-looking wretch,
  A living dead man. This pernicious slave,
  Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
  And gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
  And with no face, as 'twere, outfacing me,
  Cries out I was possess'd. Then all together
  They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
  And in a dark and dankish vault at home
  There left me and my man, both bound together;
  Till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
  I gain'd my freedom, and immediately
  Ran hither to your Grace; whom I beseech
  To give me ample satisfaction
  For these deep shames and great indignities.
I never came within these abbey walls,
  Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me;
  I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven!
  And this is false you burden me withal.
'Tis true, my liege; this ring I had of her.
I never saw you in my life till now.
Neither.
I never saw my father in my life.
The Duke and all that know me in
  the city Can witness with me that it is not so:
  I ne'er saw Syracuse in my life.
I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord.
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
  Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.
No; I say nay to that.
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
These ducats pawn I for my father here.
There, take it; and much thanks for my
  good cheer.
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd?
