Many a man would take you at your word,
  And go indeed, having so good a mean.
What answer, sir? When spake I such a word?
I did not see you since you sent me hence,
  Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.
I am glad to see you in this merry vein.
  What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me.
Hold, sir, for God's sake! Now your jest is earnest.
  Upon what bargain do you give it me?
Sconce, call you it? So you would
  leave battering, I had rather have it a head. An you use
  these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head, and
  insconce it too; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.
  But I pray, sir, why am I beaten?
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.
Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say
  every why hath a wherefore.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
  When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason?
  Well, sir, I thank you.
Marry, sir, for this something that you gave
  me for nothing.
No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.
Basting.
If it be, sir, I pray you eat none of it.
Lest it make you choleric, and purchase me
  another dry basting.
I durst have denied that, before you
  were so choleric.
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the
  plain bald pate of Father Time himself.
There's no time for a man to recover
  his hair that grows bald by nature.
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and
  recover the lost hair of another man.
Because it is a blessing that he bestows
  on beasts, and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath
  given them in wit.
Not a man of those but he hath the
  wit to lose his hair.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost;
  yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.
For two; and sound ones too.
Sure ones, then.
Certain ones, then.
The one, to save the money that he spends in
  tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his
  porridge.
Marry, and did, sir; namely, no time to recover
  hair lost by nature.
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald,
  and therefore to the world's end will have bald followers.
By me?
I, Sir? I never saw her till this time.
I never spake with her in all my life.
O, for my beads! I cross me for sinner.
  This is the fairy land. O spite of spites!
  We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites.
  If we obey them not, this will ensue:
  They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
I am transformed, master, am not I?
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
No, I am an ape.
'Tis true; she rides me, and I long for grass.
  'Tis so, I am an ass; else it could never be
  But I should know her as well as she knows me.
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?
[Within] Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!
  Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
  Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st for such store,
  When one is one too many? Go get thee from the door.
 [Within]  Let him walk from whence he came,
    lest he catch cold on's feet.
 [Within]  Right, sir; I'll tell you when,
    an you'll tell me wherefore.
 [Within]  Nor to-day here you must not;
    come again when you may.
 [Within]  The porter for this time,
    sir, and my name is Dromio.
 [Within]  If thy name be called Luce
    -Luce, thou hast answer'd him well.
 [Within]  And you said no.
 [Within]  By my troth, your town is
    troubled with unruly boys.
 [Within]  Break any breaking here,
    and I'll break your knave's pate.
 [Within]  It seems thou want'st breaking;
    out upon thee, hind!
 [Within]  Ay, when fowls have no
    feathers and fish have no fin.
Do you know me, sir? Am I Dromio?
  Am I your man? Am I myself?
I am an ass, I am a woman's man, and besides
  myself.
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due
  to a woman-one that claims me, one that haunts me, one
  that will have me.
Marry, sir, such claim as you would
  lay to your horse; and she would have me as a beast: not
  that, I being a beast, she would have me; but that she,
  being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
A very reverent body; ay, such a one
  as a man may not speak of without he say 'Sir-reverence.'
  I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
  wondrous fat marriage.
Marry, sir, she's the kitchen-wench,
  and all grease; and I know not what use to put her to but
  to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light.
  I warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn
  Poland winter. If she lives till doomsday, she'll burn
  week longer than the whole world.
Swart, like my shoe; but her face
  nothing like so clean kept; for why, she sweats, a man may
  go over shoes in the grime of it.
No, sir, 'tis in grain; Noah's flood
  could not do it.
Nell, sir; but her name and three
  quarters, that's an ell and three quarters, will not measure
  her from hip to hip.
No longer from head to foot than
  from hip to hip: she is spherical, like a globe; I could find
  out countries in her.
Marry, sir, in her buttocks; I found it out by
  the bogs.
I found it by the barrenness, hard in
  the palm of the hand.
In her forehead, arm'd and reverted,
  making war against her heir.
I look'd for the chalky cliffs, but I
  could find no whiteness in them; but I guess it stood in her
  chin, by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.
Faith, I saw it not, but I felt it hot in
  her breath.
O, sir, upon her nose, an o'er embellished with
  rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the
  hot breath of Spain; who sent whole armadoes of caracks to be
  ballast at her nose.
O, Sir, I did not look so low. To
  conclude: this drudge or diviner laid claim to me; call'd me
  Dromio; swore I was assur'd to her; told me what privy
  marks I had about me, as, the mark of my shoulder, the
  mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, that I,
  amaz'd, ran from her as a witch.
  And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith,
    and my heart of steel,
  She had transform'd me to a curtal dog, and made me turn i' th' wheel.
As from a bear a man would run for life,
  So fly I from her that would be my wife.
Master, there's a bark of Epidamnum
  That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
  And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
  I have convey'd aboard; and I have bought
  The oil, the balsamum, and aqua-vitx.
  The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
  Blows fair from land; they stay for nought at an
  But for their owner, master, and yourself.
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
YOU sent me for a rope's end as soon-
  You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
To Adriana! that is where we din'd,
  Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband.
  She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
  Thither I must, although against my will,
  For servants must their masters' minds fulfil.
Here go-the desk, the purse. Sweet
  now, make haste.
By running fast.
No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
  A devil in an everlasting garment hath him;
  One whose hard heart is button'd up with steel;
  A fiend, a fairy, pitiless and rough;
  A wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buff;
  A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that countermands
  The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands;
  A hound that runs counter, and yet draws dry-foot well;
  One that, before the Judgment, carries poor souls to hell.
I do not know the matter; he is rested on the case.
I know not at whose suit he is arrested well;
  But he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him, that can I tell.
  Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
on a band, but on a stronger thing,
  A chain, a chain. Do you not hear it ring?
No, no, the bell; 'tis time that I were gone.
  It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.
O yes. If any hour meet a sergeant,
    'a turns back for very fear.
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes
    more than he's worth to season.
  Nay, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say
  That Time comes stealing on by night and day?
  If 'a be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
  Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?

Re-enter LUCIANA with a purse

Master, here's the gold you sent me
  for. What, have you got the picture of old Adam new-apparell'd?
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise,
  but that Adam that keeps the prison; he that goes in the
  calf's skin that was kill'd for the Prodigal; he that came behind
  you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.
No? Why, 'tis a plain case: he that
  went, like a bass-viol, in a case of leather; the man, sir,
  that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob, and rest
  them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men, and give
  them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more
  exploits with his mace than a morris-pike.
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band;
  that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band; on
  that thinks a man always going to bed, and says 'God give
  you good rest!'
Why, sir, I brought you word an
  hour since that the bark Expedition put forth to-night; and
  then were you hind'red by the sergeant, to tarry for the
  boy Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.
Master, is this Mistress Satan?
Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's
  dam, and here she comes in the habit of a light wench; and
  thereof comes that the wenches say 'God damn me!' That's
  as much to say 'God make me a light wench!' It is written
  they appear to men like angels of light; light is an effect
  of fire, and fire will burn; ergo, light wenches will burn.
  Come not near her.
Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat,
  or bespeak a long spoon.
Marry, he must have a long spoon
  that must eat with the devil.
Some devils ask but the parings of one's nail,
  A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
  A nut, a cherry-stone;
  But she, more covetous, would have a chain.
  Master, be wise; an if you give it her,
  The devil will shake her chain, and fright us with it.
'Fly pride' says the peacock. Mistress, that you know.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
Faith, stay here this night; they will
  surely do us no harm; you saw they speak us fair, give us
  gold; methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
  the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me,
  could find in my heart to stay here still and turn witch.
Run, master, run; for God's sake take a house.
  This is some priory. In, or we are spoil'd.
I, sir, am Dromio; command him away.
O, my old master! who hath bound
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
There is a fat friend at your master's house,
  That kitchen'd me for you to-day at dinner;
  She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
Not I, sir; you are my elder.
We'll draw cuts for the senior; till then,
    lead thou first.
