What fellow's this?
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you avoid the
house.
What are you?
A marv'llous poor one.
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
station; here's no place for you. Pray you avoid. Come.
What, you will not? Prithee tell my master what a
strange guest he has here.
Where dwell'st thou?
Under the canopy?
Where's that?
I' th' city of kites and crows!
What an ass it is! Then thou dwell'st with daws too?
How, sir! Do you meddle with my master?
O slaves, I can tell you news- news, you rascals!
I would not be a Roman, of all nations;
I had as lief be a condemn'd man.
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general-
Caius Marcius.
I do not say 'thwack our general,' but he was always
good enough for him.
Why, he is so made on here within as if he were son
and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' th' table; no question
asked him by any of the senators but they stand bald before him.
Our general himself makes a mistress of him, sanctifies himself
with's hand, and turns up the white o' th' eye to his discourse.
But the bottom of the news is, our general is cut i' th' middle
and but one half of what he was yesterday, for the other has half
by the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by th' ears; he will mow all
down before him, and leave his passage poll'd.
Do't! He will do't; for look you, sir, he has as
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it were, durst
not- look you, sir- show themselves, as we term it, his friends,
whilst he's in directitude.
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again and
the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies
after rain, and revel an with him.
To-morrow, to-day, presently. You shall have the
drum struck up this afternoon; 'tis as it were parcel of their
feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.
Reason: because they then less need one another. The
wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap as Volscians.
They are rising, they are rising.
