Base tike, call'st thou me host?
Now by this hand, I swear I scorn the term;
Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.
Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear'd cur of
Iceland!
'Solus,' egregious dog? O viper vile!
The 'solus' in thy most mervailous face;
The 'solus' in thy teeth, and in thy throat,
And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy;
And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth!
I do retort the 'solus' in thy bowels;
For I can take, and Pistol's cock is up,
And flashing fire will follow.
O braggart vile and damned furious wight!
The grave doth gape and doting death is near;
Therefore exhale.                             [PISTOL draws]
An oath of mickle might; and fury shall abate.
                       [PISTOL and Nym sheathe their swords]
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give;
Thy spirits are most tall.
'Couple a gorge!'
That is the word. I thee defy again.
O hound of Crete, think'st thou my spouse to get?
No; to the spital go,
And from the powd'ring tub of infamy
Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid's kind,
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse.
I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly
For the only she; and- pauca, there's enough.
Go to.
                    Enter the Boy
Let floods o'erswell, and fiends for food howl on!
Base is the slave that pays.
As manhood shall compound: push home.
                                       [PISTOL and Nym draw]
Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.
                                        [Sheathes his sword]
A noble shalt thou have, and present pay;
And liquor likewise will I give to thee,
And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood.
I'll live by Nym and Nym shall live by me.
Is not this just? For I shall sutler be
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue.
Give me thy hand.
In cash most justly paid.
Nym, thou hast spoke the right;
His heart is fracted and corroborate.
Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins, we will live.
                                                      Exeunt
No; for my manly heart doth earn.
Bardolph, be blithe; Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins;
Boy, bristle thy courage up. For Falstaff he is dead,
And we must earn therefore.
Come, let's away. My love, give me thy lips.
Look to my chattles and my moveables;
Let senses rule. The word is 'Pitch and Pay.'
Trust none;
For oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes,
And Holdfast is the only dog, my duck.
Therefore, Caveto be thy counsellor.
Go, clear thy crystals. Yoke-fellows in arms,
Let us to France, like horse-leeches, my boys,
To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck.
Touch her soft mouth and march.
Let housewifery appear; keep close, I thee command.
The plain-song is most just; for humours do abound:
    Knocks go and come; God's vassals drop and die;
                And sword and shield
                In bloody field
             Doth win immortal fame.
And I:
           If wishes would prevail with me,
           My purpose should not fail with me,
               But thither would I hie.
Be merciful, great duke, to men of mould.
Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage;
Abate thy rage, great duke.
Good bawcock, bate thy rage. Use lenity, sweet chuck.
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours.
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
Bardolph, a soldier, firm and sound of heart,
And of buxom valour, hath by cruel fate
And giddy Fortune's furious fickle wheel,
That goddess blind,
That stands upon the rolling restless stone-
Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on him;
For he hath stol'n a pax, and hanged must 'a be-
A damned death!
Let gallows gape for dog; let man go free,
And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate.
But Exeter hath given the doom of death
For pax of little price.
Therefore, go speak- the Duke will hear thy voice;
And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut
With edge of penny cord and vile reproach.
Speak, Captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.
Why then, rejoice therefore.
Die and be damn'd! and figo for thy friendship!
The fig of Spain!                                 Exit
Qui va la?
Discuss unto me: art thou officer,
Or art thou base, common, and popular?
Trail'st thou the puissant pike?
As good a gentleman as the Emperor.
The King's a bawcock and a heart of gold,
A lad of life, an imp of fame;
Of parents good, of fist most valiant.
I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string
I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?
Le Roy! a Cornish name; art thou of Cornish crew?
Know'st thou Fluellen?
Tell him I'll knock his leek about his pate
Upon Saint Davy's day.
Art thou his friend?
The figo for thee, then!
My name is Pistol call'd.                         Exit
Yield, cur!
Cality! Calen o custure me! Art thou a gentleman?
What is thy name? Discuss.
O, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman.
Perpend my words, O Signieur Dew, and mark:
O Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox,
Except, O Signieur, thou do give to me
Egregious ransom.
Moy shall not serve; I will have forty moys;
Or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat
In drops of crimson blood.
Brass, cur?
Thou damned and luxurious mountain-goat,
Offer'st me brass?
Say'st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?
Come hither, boy; ask me this slave in French
What is his name.
Master Fer! I'll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him-
Bid him prepare; for I will cut his throat.
Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy!
Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns;
Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.
What are his words?
Tell him my fury shall abate, and I
The crowns will take.
Expound unto me, boy.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Follow me.                                              Exit
Ha! art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Troyan,
To have me fold up Parca's fatal web?
Hence! I am qualmish at the smell of leek.
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.
Base Troyan, thou shalt die.
Must I bite?
By this leek, I will most horribly revenge- I eat and eat,
I swear-
Quiet thy cudgel: thou dost see I eat.
Good.
Me a groat!
I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.
All hell shall stir for this.
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
News have I that my Nell is dead i' th' spital
Of malady of France;
And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.
Old I do wax; and from my weary limbs
Honour is cudgell'd. Well, bawd I'll turn,
And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.
To England will I steal, and there I'll steal;
And patches will I get unto these cudgell'd scars,
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.                Exit
