Return'd so soon! rather approach'd too late.
  The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit;
  The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell-
  My mistress made it one upon my cheek;
  She is so hot because the meat is cold,
  The meat is cold because you come not home,
  You come not home because you have no stomach,
  You have no stomach, having broke your fast;
  But we, that know what 'tis to fast and pray,
  Are penitent for your default to-day.
O-Sixpence that I had a Wednesday last
  To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper?
  The saddler had it, sir; I kept it not.
I pray you jest, sir, as you sit at dinner.
  I from my mistress come to you in post;
  If I return, I shall be post indeed,
  For she will score your fault upon my pate.
  Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,
  And strike you home without a messenger.
To me, sir? Why, you gave no gold to me.
  ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE. Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
  And tell me how thou hast dispos'd thy charge.
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
  Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner.
  My mistress and her sister stays for you.
I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
  Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders,
  But not a thousand marks between you both.
  If I should pay your worship those again,
  Perchance you will not bear them patiently.
Your worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;
  She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
  And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
What mean you, sir? For God's sake hold your hands!
  Nay, an you will not, sir, I'll take my heels.
Nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two
  ears can witness.
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear.
  Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.
Nay, he struck so plainly I could to
  well feel his blows; and withal so doubtfully that I could
  scarce understand them.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.
I mean not cuckold-mad;
  But, sure, he is stark mad.
  When I desir'd him to come home to dinner,
  He ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold.
  "Tis dinner time' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he.
  'Your meat doth burn' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he.
  'Will you come home?' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he.
  'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?'
  'The pig' quoth I 'is burn'd'; 'My gold!' quoth he.
  'My mistress, sir,' quoth I; 'Hang up thy mistress;
  I know not thy mistress; out on thy mistress.'
Quoth my master.
  'I know' quoth he 'no house, no wife, no mistress.'
  So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
  I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders;
  For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
Go back again, and be new beaten home?
  For God's sake, send some other messenger.
And he will bless that cross with other beating;
  Between you I shall have a holy head.
Am I so round with you, as you with me,
  That like a football you do spurn me thus?
  You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither;
  If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know.
  That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show;
  If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
  Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
Marry, so it doth appear
  By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
  I should kick, being kick'd; and being at that pass,
  You would keep from my heels, and beware of an ass.
Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicely, Gillian, Ginn!
What patch is made our porter?
  My master stays in the street.
O Villain, thou hast stol'n both mine
    office and my name!
  The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame.
  If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place,
  Thou wouldst have chang'd thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.

Enter LUCE, within

Let my master in, Luce.
O Lord, I must laugh!
  Have at you with a proverb: Shall I set in my staff?
SO, Come, help: well struck! there was blow for blow.
Master, knock the door hard.
If YOU went in pain, master, this 'knave' would go sore.
They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.
You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.
  Your cake here is warm within; you stand here in the cold;
  It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold.
A man may break a word with you,
    sir; and words are but wind;
  Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
Here's too much 'out upon thee!' pray thee let me in.
A crow without feather? Master, mean you so?
  For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather;
  If a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.
I buy a thousand pound a year; I buy a rope.
Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
To a rope's-end, sir; and to that end am I
  return'd.
Nay, 'tis for me to be patient; I am in
  adversity.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
I would I were senseless, sir, that I
  might not feel your blows.
I am an ass indeed; you may prove it
  by my long 'ears. I have served him from the hour of my
  nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for
  my service but blows. When I am cold he heats me with
  beating; when I am warm he cools me with beating. I am
  wak'd with it when I sleep; rais'd with it when I sit; driven
  out of doors with it when I go from home; welcom'd home
  with it when I return; nay, I bear it on my shoulders as
  beggar wont her brat; and I think, when he hath lam'd me,
  I shall beg with it from door to door.

Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the COURTEZAN, and a SCHOOLMASTER
call'd PINCH

Mistress, 'respice finem,' respect your end; or
  rather, to prophesy like the parrot, 'Beware the rope's-end.'
Sir, Sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
Perdie, your doors were lock'd and you shut out.
Sans fable, she herself revil'd you there.
Certes, she did; the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you.
In verity, you did. My bones bear witness,
  That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
Money by me! Heart and goodwill you might,
  But surely, master, not a rag of money.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness
  That I was sent for nothing but a rope!
And, gentle master, I receiv'd no gold;
  But I confess, sir, that we were lock'd out.
Master, I am here ent'red in bond for you.
Will you be bound for nothing?
  Be mad, good master; cry 'The devil!'
Sir, he din'd with her there, at the Porpentine.
Within this hour I was his bondman, sir,
  But he, I thank him, gnaw'd in two my cords
  Now am I Dromio and his man unbound.
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you;
  For lately we were bound as you are now.
  You are not Pinch's patient, are you, sir?
No, trust me, sir, nor I.
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not; and
  whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
I, Sir, am Dromio; pray let me stay.
And I with him.
No, none by me.
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother;
  I see by you I am a sweet-fac'd youth.
  Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
That's a question; how shall we try it?
Nay, then, thus:
  We came into the world like brother and brother,
  And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another.
