How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither
 (Which I can call but now) I have heard strange news.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
 Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
 A childlike office.
Is he pursued?
If he be taken, he shall never more
 Be fear'd of doing harm. Make your own purpose,
 How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
 Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
 So much commend itself, you shall be ours.
 Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
 You we first seize on.
You know not why we came to visit you-
Keep peace, upon your lives!
 He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
What is your difference? Speak.
Thou art a strange fellow. A tailor make a man?
Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
Peace, sirrah!
 You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
Why art thou angry?
What, art thou mad, old fellow?
Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?
No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.
This is some fellow
 Who, having been prais'd for bluntness, doth affect
 A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
 Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he!
 An honest mind and plain- he must speak truth!
 An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
 These kind of knaves I know which in this plainness
 Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
 Than twenty silly-ducking observants
 That stretch their duties nicely.
What mean'st by this?
What was th' offence you gave him?
Fetch forth the stocks!
 You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
 We'll teach you-
Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
 There shall he sit till noon.
This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
 Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
                                         Stocks brought out.
I'll answer that.
Hail to your Grace!
                                   Kent here set at liberty.
Fie, sir, fie!
What trumpet's that?
What means your Grace?
                        Enter Goneril.
I set him there, sir; but his own disorders
 Deserv'd much less advancement.
Let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.
Followed the old man forth.
                      Enter Gloucester.
 He is return'd.
Whither is he going?
'Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.
Shut up your doors, my lord: 'tis a wild night.
 My Regan counsels well. Come out o' th' storm.        [Exeunt.]
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
I now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil
 disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit, set
 awork by a reproveable badness in himself.
Go with me to the Duchess.
True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester.
 Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our
 apprehension.
I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer
 father in my love.
                                                     Exeunt.
[to Goneril] Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him
 this letter. The army of France is landed.- Seek out the traitor
 Gloucester.
                              [Exeunt some of the Servants.]
Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our sister
 company. The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous
 father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke where you
 are going, to a most festinate preparation. We are bound to the
 like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.
 Farewell, dear sister; farewell, my Lord of Gloucester.
                 Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
 How now? Where's the King?
Get horses for your mistress.
Edmund, farewell.
                       Exeunt Goneril, [Edmund, and Oswald].
 Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
 Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
                                    [Exeunt other Servants.]
 Though well we may not pass upon his life
 Without the form of justice, yet our power
 Shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
 May blame, but not control.
        Enter Gloucester, brought in by two or three.
 Who's there? the traitor?
Bind fast his corky arms.
Bind him, I say.
                                        [Servants bind him.]
To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find-
                                   [Regan plucks his beard.]
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
 Late footed in the kingdom?
Cunning.
Where hast thou sent the King?
Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.
See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
 Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
If you see vengeance-
 I have serv'd you ever since I was a child;
 But better service have I never done you
 Than now to bid you hold.
My villain!                               Draw and fight.
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
 Where is thy lustre now?
I have receiv'd a hurt. Follow me, lady.
 Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave
 Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace.
 Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
                              Exit [Cornwall, led by Regan].
 If this man come to good.
 And in the end meet the old course of death,
 Women will all turn monsters.
 To lead him where he would. His roguish madness
 Allows itself to anything.
 To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!
                                                     Exeunt.
