[comes forward] No, my lord.
My services to your lordship.
Sir, I shall study deserving.
Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law
 My services are bound. Wherefore should I
 Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
 The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
 For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
 Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
 When my dimensions are as well compact,
 My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
 As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
 With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
 Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
 More composition and fierce quality
 Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
 Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
 Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
 Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.
 Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
 As to th' legitimate. Fine word- 'legitimate'!
 Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
 And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
 Shall top th' legitimate. I grow; I prosper.
 Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
                      Enter Gloucester.
So please your lordship, none.
                                       [Puts up the letter.]
I know no news, my lord.
Nothing, my lord.
I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother
 that I have not all o'er-read; and for so much as I have
 perus'd, I find it not fit for your o'erlooking.
I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as
 in part I understand them, are to blame.
I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as
 an essay or taste of my virtue.
It was not brought me, my lord: there's the cunning of it. I
 found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his;
 but in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.
It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the
 contents.
Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit
 that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, the father
 should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend
 your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
 better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course;
 where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
 purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake
 in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
 for him that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your
 honour, and to no other pretence of danger.
If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall
 hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your
 satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very
 evening.
Nor is not, sure.
I will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as I
 shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
 sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we make
 guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if
 we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
 knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical pre-dominance;
 drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforc'd obedience of
 planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine
 thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whore-master man, to lay
 his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! My father
 compounded with my mother under the Dragon's Tail, and my
 nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and
 lecherous. Fut! I should have been that I am, had the
 maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.
 Edgar-
                         Enter Edgar.
 and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy. My
 cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.
 O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.
I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
 what should follow these eclipses.
I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as
 of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death,
 dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state,
 menaces and maledictions against king and nobles; needless
 diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts,
 nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
Come, come! When saw you my father last?
Spake you with him?
Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by
 word or countenance
Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him; and at my
 entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath
 qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so
 rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
 scarcely allay.
That's my fear. I pray you have a continent forbearance till
 the speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me
 to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my
 lord speak. Pray ye, go! There's my key. If you do stir abroad,
 go arm'd.
Brother, I advise you to the best. Go arm'd. I am no honest man
 if there be any good meaning toward you. I have told you what I
 have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and
 horror of it. Pray you, away!
I do serve you in this business.
                                                 Exit Edgar.
 A credulous father! and a brother noble,
 Whose nature is so far from doing harms
 That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
 My practices ride easy! I see the business.
 Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
 All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.
Save thee, Curan.
How comes that?
Not I. Pray you, what are they?
Not a word.
The Duke be here to-night? The better! best!
 This weaves itself perforce into my business.
 My father hath set guard to take my brother;
 And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
 Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work!
 Brother, a word! Descend! Brother, I say!
                         Enter Edgar.
 My father watches. O sir, fly this place!
 Intelligence is given where you are hid.
 You have now the good advantage of the night.
 Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
 He's coming hither; now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
 And Regan with him. Have you nothing said
 Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
 Advise yourself.
I hear my father coming. Pardon me!
 In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
 Draw, seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.-
 Yield! Come before my father. Light, ho, here!
 Fly, brother.- Torches, torches!- So farewell.
                                                 Exit Edgar.
 Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
 Of my more fierce endeavour. [Stabs his arm.] I have seen
    drunkards
 Do more than this in sport.- Father, father!-
 Stop, stop! No help?
         Enter Gloucester, and Servants with torches.
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
 Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
 To stand 's auspicious mistress.
Look, sir, I bleed.
Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could-
Persuade me to the murther of your lordship;
 But that I told him the revenging gods
 'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
 Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
 The child was bound to th' father- sir, in fine,
 Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
 To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
 With his prepared sword he charges home
 My unprovided body, lanch'd mine arm;
 But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,
 Bold in the quarrel's right, rous'd to th' encounter,
 Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
 Full suddenly he fled.
When I dissuaded him from his intent
 And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
 I threaten'd to discover him. He replied,
 'Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think,
 If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
 Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
 Make thy words faith'd? No. What I should deny
 (As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce
 My very character), I'ld turn it all
 To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice;
 And thou must make a dullard of the world,
 If they not thought the profits of my death
 Were very pregnant and potential spurs
 To make thee seek it.'
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
'Twas my duty, sir.
I shall serve you, sir,
 Truly, however else.
How now? What's the matter?                 Parts [them].
Most savage and unnatural!
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
 Instantly know, and of that letter too.
 This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
 That which my father loses- no less than all.
 The younger rises when the old doth fall.             Exit.
How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to
 loyalty, something fears me to think of.
How malicious is my fortune that I must repent to be just!
 This is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an
 intelligent party to the advantages of France. O heavens! that
 this treason were not- or not I the detector!
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty
 business in hand.
[aside] If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his
 suspicion more fully.- I will persever in my course of loyalty,
 though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
Yours in the ranks of death!                        Exit.
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
 Or whether since he is advis'd by aught
 To change the course. He's full of alteration
 And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.
                                          [Exit an Officer.]
Tis to be doubted, madam.
In honour'd love.
That thought abuses you.
No, by mine honour, madam.
Fear me not.
 She and the Duke her husband!
   Enter, with Drum and Colours, Albany, Goneril, Soldiers.
Sir, you speak nobly.
I shall attend you presently at your tent.
The enemy 's in view; draw up your powers.
 Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
 By diligent discovery; but your haste
 Is now urg'd on you.
To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
 Each jealous of the other, as the stung
 Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
 Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,
 If both remain alive. To take the widow
 Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
 And hardly shall I carry out my side,
 Her husband being alive. Now then, we'll use
 His countenance for the battle, which being done,
 Let her who would be rid of him devise
 His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
 Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia-
 The battle done, and they within our power,
 Shall never see his pardon; for my state
 Stands on me to defend, not to debate.                Exit.
Some officers take them away. Good guard
 Until their greater pleasures first be known
 That are to censure them.
Take them away.
Come hither, Captain; hark.
 Take thou this note [gives a paper]. Go follow them to prison.
 One step I have advanc'd thee. If thou dost
 As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
 To noble fortunes. Know thou this, that men
 Are as the time is. To be tender-minded
 Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
 Will not bear question. Either say thou'lt do't,
 Or thrive by other means.
About it! and write happy when th' hast done.
 Mark- I say, instantly; and carry it so
 As I have set it down.
Sir, I thought it fit
 To send the old and miserable King
 To some retention and appointed guard;
 Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
 To pluck the common bosom on his side
 And turn our impress'd lances in our eyes
 Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,
 My reason all the same; and they are ready
 To-morrow, or at further space, t' appear
 Where you shall hold your session. At this time
 We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
 And the best quarrels, in the heat, are curs'd
 By those that feel their sharpness.
 The question of Cordelia and her father
 Requires a fitter place.
Nor in thine, lord.
There's my exchange [throws down a glove]. What in the world
    he is
 That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.
 Call by thy trumpet. He that dares approach,
 On him, on you, who not? I will maintain
 My truth and honour firmly.
A herald, ho, a herald!
Sound!                                     First trumpet.
Himself. What say'st thou to him?
In wisdom I should ask thy name;
 But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
 And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
 What safe and nicely I might well delay
 By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
 Back do I toss those treasons to thy head;
 With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
 Which- for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise-
 This sword of mine shall give them instant way
 Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!
                             Alarums. Fight. [Edmund falls.]
What, you have charg'd me with, that have I done,
 And more, much more. The time will bring it out.
 'Tis past, and so am I.- But what art thou
 That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,
 I do forgive thee.
Th' hast spoken right; 'tis true.
 The wheel is come full circle; I am here.
This speech of yours hath mov'd me,
 And shall perchance do good; but speak you on;
 You look as you had something more to say.
I was contracted to them both. All three
 Now marry in an instant.
                         Enter Kent.
Yet Edmund was belov'd.
 The one the other poisoned for my sake,
 And after slew herself.
I pant for life. Some good I mean to do,
 Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send
 (Be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
 Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.
 Nay, send in time.
Well thought on. Take my sword;
 Give it the Captain.
He hath commission from thy wife and me
 To hang Cordelia in the prison and
 To lay the blame upon her own despair
 That she fordid herself.
