Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe;
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to look, and practise by myself.
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me-
That I disdain; but for these other gawds,
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
I'll plead for you myself but you shall have him.
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay, then you jest; and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while.
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
To strive for that which resteth in my choice.
I arn no breeching scholar in the schools,
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And to cut off all strife: here sit we down;
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles!
His lecture will be done ere you have tun'd.
Where left we last?
Construe them.
Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.
Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat Simois' I
know you not- 'hic est Sigeia tellus' I trust you not- 'Hic
steterat Priami' take heed he hear us not- 'regia' presume not-
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt;
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you.
Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
 [Reads]
     '"Gamut" I am, the ground of all accord-
     "A re" to plead Hortensio's passion-
     "B mi" Bianca, take him for thy lord-
     "C fa ut" that loves with all affection-
     "D sol re" one clef, two notes have I-
     "E la mi" show pity or I die.'
Call you this gamut? Tut, I like it not!
Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice
To change true rules for odd inventions.
                   Enter a SERVANT
Farewell, sweet masters, both; I must be gone.
                                   Exeunt BIANCA and SERVANT
That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
What, master, read you, First resolve me that.
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!
Tranio, you jest; but have you both forsworn me?
God give him joy!
He says so, Tranio.
The taming-school! What, is there such a place?
Pardon, dear father.
Cambio is chang'd into Lucentio.
Head and butt! An hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.
Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
You are welcome all.
                         Exeunt BIANCA, KATHERINA, and WIDOW
Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
