What, John Rugby! I pray thee go to the casement
and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor
Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, and find anybody in the
house, here will be an old abusing of God's patience and
the King's English.
Go; and we'll have a posset for't soon at night, in
faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.  [Exit RUGBY]  An
honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come in
house withal; and, I warrant you, no tell-tale nor no
breed-bate; his worst fault is that he is given to prayer; he is
something peevish that way; but nobody but has his fault;
but let that pass. Peter Simple you say your name is?
And Master Slender's your master?
Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
glover's paring-knife?
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
How say you? O, I should remember him. Does
he not hold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait?
Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune!
Tell Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your
master. Anne is a good girl, and I wish-
                     Re-enter RUGBY
We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young
man; go into this closet.  [Shuts SIMPLE in the closet]  He
will not stay long. What, John Rugby! John! what, John,
I say! Go, John, go inquire for my master; I doubt he be
not well that he comes not home.  [Singing]
And down, down, adown-a, etc.
                   Enter DOCTOR CAIUS
Ay, forsooth, I'll fetch it you.  [Aside]  I am glad
he went not in himself; if he had found the young man,
he would have been horn-mad.
Is it this, sir?
What, John Rugby? John!
Ay me, he'll find the young man there, and be
mad!
Good master, be content.
The young man is an honest man.
I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic; hear the
truth of it. He came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.
Peace, I pray you.
This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my finger
in the fire, and need not.
 [Aside to SIMPLE]  I am glad he is so quiet; if he
had been throughly moved, you should have heard him
so loud and so melancholy. But notwithstanding, man, I'll
do you your master what good I can; and the very yea and
the no is, the French doctor, my master-I may call him
my master, look you, for I keep his house; and I wash,
wring, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink, make the
beds, and do all myself-
 [Aside to SIMPLE]  Are you avis'd o' that? You
shall find it a great charge; and to be up early and down
late; but notwithstanding-to tell you in your ear, I would
have no words of it-my master himself is in love with
Mistress Anne Page; but notwithstanding that, I know
Anne's mind-that's neither here nor there.
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
must give folks leave to prate. What the good-year!
You shall have-An fool's-head of your own. No,
I know Anne's mind for that; never a woman in Windsor
knows more of Anne's mind than I do; nor can do more
than I do with her, I thank heaven.
Who's there, I trow? Come near the house, I pray
you.
                      Enter FENTON
The better that it pleases your good worship to
ask.
In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and
gentle; and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by
the way; I praise heaven for it.
Troth, sir, all is in His hands above; but
notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn on a book
she loves you. Have not your worship a wart above your eye?
Well, thereby hangs a tale; good faith, it is such
another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever broke
bread. We had an hour's talk of that wart; I shall never
laugh but in that maid's company! But, indeed, she is
given too much to allicholy and musing; but for you-well,
go to.
Will I? I' faith, that we will; and I will tell your
worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence;
and of other wooers.
Farewell to your worship.  [Exit FENTON]  Truly,
an honest gentleman; but Anne loves him not; for I know
Anne's mind as well as another does. Out upon 't, what
have I forgot?                                          Exit
Ay, forsooth; and, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?
Give your worship good morrow.
Not so, an't please your worship.
I'll be sworn;
As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
There is one Mistress Ford, sir-I pray, come a little
nearer this ways. I myself dwell with Master Doctor
Caius.
Your worship says very true. I pray your worship
come a little nearer this ways.
Are they so? God bless them, and make them his
servants!
Why, sir, she's a good creature. Lord, Lord, your
worship's a wanton! Well, heaven forgive you, and all of
us, I pray.
Marry, this is the short and the long of it: you
have brought her into such a canaries as 'tis wonderful.
The best courtier of them all, when the court lay at Windsor,
could never have brought her to such a canary. Yet
there has been knights, and lords, and gentlemen, with
their coaches; I warrant you, coach after coach, letter after
letter, gift after gift; smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so
rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold; and in such alligant
terms; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the
fairest, that would have won any woman's heart; and I
warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of her.
I had myself twenty angels given me this morning; but I
defy all angels, in any such sort, as they say, but in the
way of honesty; and, I warrant you, they could never get
her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all;
and yet there has been earls, nay, which is more,
pensioners; but, I warrant you, all is one with her.
Marry, she hath receiv'd your letter; for the
which she thanks you a thousand times; and she gives you
to notify that her husband will be absence from his house
between ten and eleven.
Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see
the picture, she says, that you wot of. Master Ford, her
husband, will be from home. Alas, the sweet woman leads
an ill life with him! He's a very jealousy man; she leads a
very frampold life with him, good heart.
Why, you say well. But I have another messenger
to your worship. Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations
to you too; and let me tell you in your ear, she's as
fartuous a civil modest wife, and one, I tell you, that will
not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in
Windsor, whoe'er be the other; and she bade me tell your
worship that her husband is seldom from home, but she
hopes there will come a time. I never knew a woman so
dote upon a man: surely I think you have charms, la! Yes,
in truth.
Blessing on your heart for 't!
That were a jest indeed! They have not so little
grace, I hope-that were a trick indeed! But Mistress Page
would desire you to send her your little page of all loves.
Her husband has a marvellous infection to the little page;
and truly Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in
Windsor leads a better life than she does; do what she will,
say what she will, take all, pay all, go to bed when she
list, rise when she list, all is as she will; and truly she
deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she
is one. You must send her your page; no remedy.
Nay, but do so then; and, look you, he may come
and go between you both; and in any case have a
nay-word, that you may know one another's mind, and the boy
never need to understand any thing; for 'tis not good that
children should know any wickedness. Old folks, you
know, have discretion, as they say, and know the world.
Hark ye, Master Slender would speak a word
with you.
And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a
word with you.
Speak to Mistress Page.
That's my master, Master Doctor.
This is my doing now: 'Nay,' said I 'will you cast
away your child on a fool, and a physician? Look on
Master Fenton.' This is my doing.
Now Heaven send thee good fortune!  [Exit
FENTON]  A kind heart he hath; a woman would run through
fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet I would my
master had Mistress Anne; or I would Master Slender had
her; or, in sooth, I would Master Fenton had her; I will
do what I can for them all three, for so I have promis'd,
and I'll be as good as my word; but speciously for Master
Fenton. Well, I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff
from my two mistresses. What a beast am I to slack it!
By your leave; I cry you mercy. Give your
worship good morrow.
Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress
Ford.
Alas the day, good heart, that was not her fault!
She does so take on with her men; they mistook their
erection.
Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn
your heart to see it. Her husband goes this morning
a-birding; she desires you once more to come to her between
eight and nine; I must carry her word quickly. She'll make
you amends, I warrant you.
I will tell her.
Eight and nine, sir.
Peace be with you, sir.                          Exit
Sure he is by this; or will be presently; but truly
he is very courageous mad about his throwing into the
water. Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly.
Blessing of his heart!
Truly, I thought there had been one number
more, because they say 'Od's nouns.'
Polecats! There are fairer things than polecats,
sure.
'Hang-hog' is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.
And that's a good root.
Vengeance of Jenny's case; fie on her! Never
name her, child, if she be a whore.
YOU do ill to teach the child such words. He
teaches him to hick and to hack, which they'll do fast
enough of themselves; and to call 'horum'; fie upon you!
From the two parties, forsooth.
And have not they suffer'd? Yes, I warrant;
speciously one of them; Mistress Ford, good heart, is beaten
black and blue, that you cannot see a white spot about her.
Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber; you
shall hear how things go, and, I warrant, to your content.
Here is a letter will say somewhat. Good hearts, what ado
here is to bring you together! Sure, one of you does not
serve heaven well, that you are so cross'd.
I'll provide you a chain, and I'll do what I can to
get you a pair of horns.
