We John Cade, so term'd of our supposed father-
For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with the
spirit of putting down kings and princes- command silence.
My father was a Mortimer-
My mother a Plantagenet-
My wife descended of the Lacies-
Therefore am I of an honourable house.
Valiant I am.
I am able to endure much.
I fear neither sword nor fire.
Be brave, then, for your captain is brave, and vows
reformation. There shall be in England seven halfpenny loaves
sold for a penny; the three-hoop'd pot shall have ten hoops; and
I will make it felony to drink small beer. All the realm shall be
in common, and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass. And
when I am king- as king I will be
I thank you, good people- there shall be no money; all shall
eat and drink on my score, and I will apparel them all in one
livery, that they may agree like brothers and worship me their
lord.
Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable thing, that
of the skin of an innocent lamb should be made parchment? That
parchment, being scribbl'd o'er, should undo a man? Some say the
bee stings; but I say 'tis the bee's wax; for I did but seal once
to a thing, and I was never mine own man since. How now! Who's
there?
          Enter some, bringing in the CLERK OF CHATHAM
O monstrous!
Here's a villain!
Nay, then he is a conjurer.
I am sorry for't; the man is a proper man, of mine honour;
unless I find him guilty, he shall not die. Come hither, sirrah,
I must examine thee. What is thy name?
Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name, or hast thou a
mark to thyself, like a honest plain-dealing man?
Away with him, I say! Hang him with his pen and inkhorn about
his neck.                            Exit one with the CLERK
                       Enter MICHAEL
Here I am, thou particular fellow.
Stand, villain, stand, or I'll fell thee down. He shall be
encount'red with a man as good as himself. He is but a knight,
is 'a?
To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
[Kneels] Rise up, Sir John Mortimer. [Rises] Now have at him!
            Enter SIR HUMPHREY STAFFORD and WILLIAM
              his brother, with drum and soldiers
As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not;
It is to you, good people, that I speak,
O'er whom, in time to come, I hope to reign;
For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
And Adam was a gardener.
Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March,
Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not?
By her he had two children at one birth.
Ay, there's the question; but I say 'tis true.
The elder of them being put to nurse,
Was by a beggar-woman stol'n away,
And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a bricklayer when he came to age.
His son am I; deny it if you can.
[Aside] He lies, for I invented it myself- Go to, sirrah,
tell the King from me that for his father's sake, Henry the
Fifth, in whose time boys went to span-counter for French crowns,
I am content he shall reign; but I'll be Protector over him.
And good reason; for thereby is England main'd and fain to go
with a staff, but that my puissance holds it up. Fellow kings, I
tell you that that Lord Say hath gelded the commonwealth and made
it an eunuch; and more than that, he can speak French, and
therefore he is a traitor.
Nay, answer if you can; the Frenchmen are our enemies. Go to,
then, I ask but this: can he that speaks with the tongue of an
enemy be a good counsellor, or no?
And you that love the commons follow me.
Now show yourselves men; 'tis for liberty.
We will not leave one lord, one gentleman;
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon,
For they are thrifty honest men and such
As would- but that they dare not- take our parts.
But then are we in order when we are most out of order. Come,
march forward.                                        Exeunt
Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford?
They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou behavedst
thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own slaughter-house;
therefore thus will I reward thee- the Lent shall be as long
again as it is, and thou shalt have a licence to kill for a
hundred lacking one.
And, to speak truth, thou deserv'st no less. [Putting on SIR
HUMPHREY'S brigandine] This monument of the victory will I bear,
and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse heels till I do come
to London, where we will have the mayor's sword borne before us.
Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, let's march towards
London.                                               Exeunt
Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting upon
London Stone, I charge and command that, of the city's cost, the
pissing conduit run nothing but claret wine this first year of
our reign. And now henceforward it shall be treason for any that
calls me other than Lord Mortimer.
                Enter a SOLDIER, running
Knock him down there.                    [They kill him]
Come then, let's go fight with them. But first go and set
London Bridge on fire; and, if you can, burn down the Tower too.
Come, let's away.                                     Exeunt
So, sirs. Now go some and pull down the Savoy; others to th'
Inns of Court; down with them all.
Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.
I have thought upon it; it shall be so. Away, burn all the
records of the realm. My mouth shall be the Parliament of
England.
And henceforward all things shall be in common.
                      Enter a MESSENGER
Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah, thou say,
thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! Now art thou within point
blank of our jurisdiction regal. What canst thou answer to my
Majesty for giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu the
Dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these presence, even
the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the besom that must
sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art. Thou hast most
traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a
grammar school; and whereas, before, our forefathers had no other
books but the score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to
be us'd, and, contrary to the King, his crown, and dignity, thou
hast built a paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou
hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and
such abominable words as no Christian ear can endure to hear.
Thou hast appointed justices of peace, to call poor men before
them about matters they were not able to answer. Moreover, thou
hast put them in prison, and because they could not read, thou
hast hang'd them, when, indeed, only for that cause they have
been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost
thou not?
Marry, thou ought'st not to let thy horse wear a cloak, when
honester men than thou go in their hose and doublets.
Away with him, away with him! He speaks Latin.
Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field?
Give him a box o' th' ear, and that will make 'em red again.
Ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the help of hatchet.
Nay, he nods at us, as who should say 'I'll be even with
you'; I'll see if his head will stand steadier on a pole, or no.
Take him away, and behead him.
[Aside] I feel remorse in myself with his words; but I'll
bridle it. He shall die, an it be but for pleading so well for
his life.- Away with him! He has a familiar under his tongue; he
speaks not o' God's name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike
off his head presently, and then break into his son-in-law's
house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them
both upon two poles hither.
Away with him, and do as I command ye.  [Exeunt some with
LORD SAY]  The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head
on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute; there shall not a
maid be married, but she shall pay to me her maidenhead ere they
have it. Men shall hold of me in capite; and we charge and
command that their wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue
can tell.
Marry, presently.
But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another, for they
lov'd well when they were alive. Now part them again, lest they
consult about the giving up of some more towns in France.
Soldiers, defer the spoil of the city until night; for with these
borne before us instead of maces will we ride through the
streets, and at every corner have them kiss. Away!     Exeunt
Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus' Corner! Kill and knock
down! Throw them into Thames!               [Sound a parley]
What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to sound retreat
or parley when I command them kill?
        Enter BUCKINGHAM and old CLIFFORD, attended
What, Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave?
And you, base peasants, do ye believe him? Will you needs be
hang'd with your about your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke
through London gates, that you should leave me at the White Hart
in Southwark? I thought ye would never have given out these arms
till you had recovered your ancient freedom. But you are all
recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the
nobility. Let them break your backs with burdens, take your
houses over your heads, ravish your wives and daughters before
your faces. For me, I will make shift for one; and so God's curse
light upon you all!
Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this
multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them to an hundred
mischiefs, and makes them leave me desolate. I see them lay their
heads together to surprise me. My sword make way for me for here
is no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have through
the very middest of you! and heavens and honour be witness that
no want of resolution in me, but only my followers' base and
ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.
Fie on ambitions! Fie on myself, that have a sword and yet am
ready to famish! These five days have I hid me in these woods and
durst not peep out, for all the country is laid for me; but now
am I so hungry that, if I might have a lease of my life for a
thousand years, I could stay no longer. Wherefore, on a brick
wall have I climb'd into this garden, to see if I can eat grass
or pick a sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a
man's stomach this hot weather. And I think this word 'sallet'
was born to do me good; for many a time, but for a sallet, my
brain-pain had been cleft with a brown bill; and many a time,
when I have been dry, and bravely marching, it hath serv'd me
instead of a quart-pot to drink in; and now the word 'sallet'
must serve me to feed on.
                         Enter IDEN
Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for
entering his fee-simple without leave. Ah, villain, thou wilt
betray me, and get a thousand crowns of the King by carrying my
head to him; but I'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich and
swallow my sword like a great pin ere thou and I part.
Brave thee? Ay, by the best blood that ever was broach'd, and
beard thee too. Look on me well: I have eat no meat these five
days, yet come thou and thy five men and if I do not leave you
all as dead as a door-nail, I pray God I may never eat grass
more.
By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I heard!
Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out the burly bon'd
clown in chines of beef ere thou sleep in thy sheath, I beseech
God on my knees thou mayst be turn'd to hobnails. [Here they
fight; CADE falls] O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain
me. Let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me but the
ten meals I have lost, and I'd defy them all. Wither, garden, and
be henceforth a burying place to all that do dwell in this house,
because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
Iden, farewell; and be proud of thy victory. Tell Kent from
me she hath lost her best man, and exhort all the world to be
cowards; for I, that never feared any, am vanquished by famine,
not by valour.                                        [Dies]
