Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;
When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
Are they not Athenians?
Then I repent not.
Thou know'st I do; I call'd thee by thy name.
Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.
To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
Right, if doing nothing be death by th' law.
The best, for the innocence.
He wrought better that made the painter; and yet he's
but a filthy piece of work.
Thy mother's of my generation; what's she, if I be a dog?
No; I eat not lords.
O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
So thou apprehend'st it take it for thy labour.
Not so well as plain dealing, which will not cost a man
a doit.
Not worth my thinking. How now, poet!
Thou liest.
Yes.
Art not a poet?
Then thou liest. Look in thy last work, where thou hast
feign'd him a worthy fellow.
Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy
labour. He that loves to be flattered is worthy o' th' flatterer.
Heavens, that I were a lord!
E'en as Apemantus does now: hate a lord with my heart.
Ay.
That I had no angry wit to be a lord.- Art not thou a
merchant?
Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
Traffic's thy god, and thy god confound thee!
            Trumpet sounds. Enter a MESSENGER
So, so, there!
Aches contract and starve your supple joints!
That there should be small love amongst these sweet knaves,
And all this courtesy! The strain of man's bred out
Into baboon and monkey.
Time to be honest.
The more accursed thou that still omit'st it.
Ay; to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give
thee none.
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding; make thy requests
to thy friend.
I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' th' ass.  Exit
Ho, ho, confess'd it! Hang'd it, have you not?
No;
You shall not make me welcome.
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon.
I come to observe; I give thee warning on't.
I scorn thy meat; 't'would choke me, for I should ne'er
flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of men eats Timon, and he
sees 'em not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in one
man's blood; and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.
I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.
Methinks they should invite them without knives:
Good for their meat and safer for their lives.
There's much example for't; the fellow that sits next him now,
parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided
draught, is the readiest man to kill him. 'T has been proved. If
I were a huge man I should fear to drink at meals.
Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:
Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
Flow this way! A brave fellow! He keeps his tides well.
Those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.
Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner, honest water, which
ne'er left man i' th' mire.
This and my food are equals; there's no odds.'
Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.
              APEMANTUS' Grace
       Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;
       I pray for no man but myself.
       Grant I may never prove so fond
       To trust man on his oath or bond,
       Or a harlot for her weeping,
       Or a dog that seems a-sleeping,
       Or a keeper with my freedom,
       Or my friends, if I should need 'em.
       Amen. So fall to't.
       Rich men sin, and I eat root.       [Eats and drinks]
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!
Would all those flatterers were thine enemies then, that
then thou mightst kill 'em, and bid me to 'em.
Thou weep'st to make them drink, Timon.
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
Much!                                [Sound tucket]
Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way!
They dance? They are mad women.
Like madness is the glory of this life,
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make ourselves fools to disport ourselves,
And spend our flatteries to drink those men
Upon whose age we void it up again
With poisonous spite and envy.
Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?
Who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves
Of their friends' gift?
I should fear those that dance before me now
Would one day stamp upon me. 'T has been done:
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
     The LORDS rise from table, with much adoring of
    TIMON; and to show their loves, each single out an
      Amazon, and all dance, men witb women, a lofty
        strain or two to the hautboys, and cease
Faith, for the worst is filthy, and would not hold
taking, I doubt me.
What a coil's here!
Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!
I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
That are given for 'em. Friendship's full of dregs:
Methinks false hearts should never have sound legs.
Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on curtsies.
No, I'll nothing; for if I should be brib'd too, there
would be none left to rail upon thee, and then thou wouldst sin
the faster. Thou giv'st so long, Timon, I fear me thou wilt give
away thyself in paper shortly. What needs these feasts, pomps,
and vain-glories?
So. Thou wilt not hear me now: thou shalt not then. I'll
lock thy heaven from thee.
O that men's ears should be
To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!                   Exit
Dost dialogue with thy shadow?
No, 'tis to thyself. [To the FOOL] Come away.
your back already.
No, thou stand'st single; th'art not on him yet.
He last ask'd the question. Poor rogues and usurers'
men! Bawds between gold and want!
Asses.
That you ask me what you are, and do not know
yourselves. Speak to 'em, fool.
Good! gramercy.
                       Enter PAGE
Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee
profitably!
Canst not read?
There will little learning die, then, that day thou art
hang'd. This is to Lord Timon; this to Alcibiades. Go; thou wast
born a bastard, and thou't die a bawd.
E'en so thou outrun'st grace.
Fool, I will go with you to Lord Timon's.
If Timon stay at home. You three serve three usurers?
So would I- as good a trick as ever hangman serv'd
thief.
Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster and a
knave; which notwithstanding, thou shalt be no less esteemed.
That answer might have become Apemantus.
                Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS
Come with me, fool, come.
I was directed hither. Men report
Thou dost affect my manners and dost use them.
This is in thee a nature but infected,
A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
From change of fortune. Why this spade, this place?
This slave-like habit and these looks of care?
Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft,
Hug their diseas'd perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou'lt observe
Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent. Thou wast told thus;
Thou gav'st thine ears, like tapsters that bade welcome,
To knaves and all approachers. 'Tis most just
That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again
Rascals should have't. Do not assume my likeness.
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself;
A madman so long, now a fool. What, think'st
That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist trees,
That have outliv'd the eagle, page thy heels
And skip when thou point'st out? Will the cold brook,
Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste
To cure thy o'ernight's surfeit? Call the creatures
Whose naked natures live in all the spite
Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
To the conflicting elements expos'd,
Answer mere nature- bid them flatter thee.
O, thou shalt find-
I love thee better now than e'er I did.
Why?
I flatter not, but say thou art a caitiff.
To vex thee.
Ay.
If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, 'twere well; but thou
Dost it enforcedly. Thou'dst courtier be again
Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery
Outlives incertain pomp, is crown'd before.
The one is filling still, never complete;
The other, at high wish. Best state, contentless,
Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
Worse than the worst, content.
Thou should'st desire to die, being miserable.
Art thou proud yet?
I, that I was
No prodigal.
Here! I will mend thy feast.
                                         [Offering him food]
So I shall mend mine own by th' lack of thine.
What wouldst thou have to Athens?
Here is no use for gold.
Where liest a nights, Timon?
Where my stomach. finds meat; or rather, where I eat it.
Where wouldst thou send it?
The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the
extremity of both ends. When thou wast in thy gilt and thy
perfume, they mock'd thee for too much curiosity; in thy rags
thou know'st none, but art despis'd for the contrary. There's a
medlar for thee; eat it.
Dost hate a medlar?
An th' hadst hated medlars sooner, thou shouldst have
loved thyself better now. What man didst thou ever know unthrift
that was beloved after his means?
Myself.
What things in the world canst thou nearest compare to
thy flatterers?
Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.
Ay, Timon.
If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thou
mightst have hit upon it here. The commonwealth of Athens is
become a forest of beasts.
Yonder comes a poet and a painter. The plague of company
light upon thee! I will fear to catch it, and give way. When I
know not what else to do, I'll see thee again.
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.
There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.
I would my tongue could rot them off!
Would thou wouldst burst!
Beast!
Toad!
Would 'twere so!
But not till I am dead. I'll say th' hast gold.
Thou wilt be throng'd to shortly.
Ay.
Live, and love thy misery!
