Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.
For my part, I care not; I say little, but when time shall
serve, there shall be smiles- but that shall be as it may. I dare
not fight; but I will wink and hold out mine iron. It is a simple
one; but what though? It will toast cheese, and it will endure
cold as another man's sword will; and there's an end.
Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the certain of it;
and when I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may. That is my
rest, that is the rendezvous of it.
I cannot tell; things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and
they may have their throats about them at that time; and some say
knives have edges. It must be as it may; though patience be a
tired mare, yet she will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I
cannot tell.
                 Enter PISTOL and HOSTESS
How now, mine host Pistol!
Pish!
Will you shog off? I would have you solus.
I am not Barbason: you cannot conjure me. I have an humour to
knock you indifferently well. If you grow foul with me, Pistol, I
will scour you with my rapier, as I may, in fair terms; if you
would walk off I would prick your guts a little, in good terms,
as I may, and thaes the humour of it.
I will cut thy throat one time or other, in fair terms; that
is the humour of it.
You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?
That now I will have; that's the humour of it.
I shall have my eight shillings I won of you at betting?
[Sheathing his sword] I shall have my noble?
[Shaking hands] Well, then, that's the humour of't.
                   Re-enter HOSTESS
The King hath run bad humours on the knight; that's the even
of it.
The King is a good king, but it must be as it may; he passes
some humours and careers.
They say he cried out of sack.
Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.
I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it; but adieu.
Pray thee, Corporal, stay; the knocks are too hot, and for
mine own part I have not a case of lives. The humour of it is too
hot; that is the very plain-song of it.
These be good humours. Your honour wins bad humours.
                                          Exeunt all but BOY
