Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
 Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
 Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;
 No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
 As much as child e'er lov'd, or father found;
 A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.
 Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
Prescribe not us our duties.
Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly
 appertains to us both. I think our father will hence to-night.
You see how full of changes his age is. The observation we
 have made of it hath not been little. He always lov'd our
 sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her
 off appears too grossly.
The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then
 must we look to receive from his age, not alone the
 imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal
 the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with
 them.
There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
 him. Pray you let's hit together. If our father carry authority
 with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his
 will but offend us.
We must do something, and i' th' heat.
                                                     Exeunt.
Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
By day and night, he wrongs me! Every hour
 He flashes into one gross crime or other
 That sets us all at odds. I'll not endure it.
 His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
 On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
 I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.
 If you come slack of former services,
 You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
                                             [Horns within.]
Put on what weary negligence you please,
 You and your fellows. I'd have it come to question.
 If he distaste it, let him to our sister,
 Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
 Not to be overrul'd. Idle old man,
 That still would manage those authorities
 That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
 Old fools are babes again, and must be us'd
 With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus'd.
 Remember what I have said.
And let his knights have colder looks among you.
 What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.
 I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
 That I may speak. I'll write straight to my sister
 To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
                                                     Exeunt.
Not only, sir, this your all-licens'd fool,
 But other of your insolent retinue
 Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
 In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,
 I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
 To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
 By what yourself, too, late have spoke and done,
 That you protect this course, and put it on
 By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
 Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
 Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
 Might in their working do you that offence
 Which else were shame, that then necessity
 Must call discreet proceeding.
Come, sir,
 I would you would make use of that good wisdom
 Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
 These dispositions that of late transform you
 From what you rightly are.
This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savour
 Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
 To understand my purposes aright.
 As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
 Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
 Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd, and bold
 That this our court, infected with their manners,
 Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
 Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
 Than a grac'd palace. The shame itself doth speak
 For instant remedy. Be then desir'd
 By her that else will take the thing she begs
 A little to disquantity your train,
 And the remainder that shall still depend
 To be such men as may besort your age,
 Which know themselves, and you.
You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble
 Make servants of their betters.
                        Enter Albany.
Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
 But let his disposition have that scope
 That dotage gives it.
                         Enter Lear.
Do you mark that, my lord?
Pray you, content.- What, Oswald, ho!
 [To the Fool] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master!
This man hath had good counsel! A hundred knights?
 'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
 At point a hundred knights; yes, that on every dream,
 Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
 He may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs
 And hold our lives in mercy.- Oswald, I say!
Safer than trust too far.
 Let me still take away the harms I fear,
 Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.
 What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister.
 If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
 When I have show'd th' unfitness-
                 Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
 How now, Oswald?
 What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
Take you some company, and away to horse!
 Inform her full of my particular fear,
 And thereto add such reasons of your own
 As may compact it more. Get you gone,
 And hasten your return. [Exit Oswald.] No, no, my lord!
 This milky gentleness and course of yours,
 Though I condemn it not, yet, under pardon,
 You are much more at task for want of wisdom
 Than prais'd for harmful mildness.
Nay then-
Why not by th' hand, sir? How have I offended?
 All's not offence that indiscretion finds
 And dotage terms so.
At your choice, sir.
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
 From those that she calls servants, or from mine?
Hear, me, my lord.
 What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,
 To follow in a house where twice so many
 Have a command to tend you?
'Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest
 And must needs taste his folly.
So am I purpos'd.
 Where is my Lord of Gloucester?
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
Pluck out his eyes.
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
 Not met us on the way.
                 Enter [Oswald the] Steward.
 Now, where's your master?
[to Edmund] Then shall you go no further.
 It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
 That dares not undertake. He'll not feel wrongs
 Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
 May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.
 Hasten his musters and conduct his pow'rs.
 I must change arms at home and give the distaff
 Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
 Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear
 (If you dare venture in your own behalf)
 A mistress's command. Wear this.          [Gives a favour.]
 Spare speech.
 Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,
 Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
 Conceive, and fare thee well.
My most dear Gloucester!
 O, the difference of man and man!
 To thee a woman's services are due;
 My fool usurps my body.
I have been worth the whistle.
No more! The text is foolish.
Milk-liver'd man!
 That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
 Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
 Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know'st
 Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd
 Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?
 France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,
 With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
 Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit'st still, and criest
 'Alack, why does he so?'
O vain fool!
Marry, your manhood mew!
                      Enter a Gentleman.
[aside] One way I like this well;
 But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
 May all the building in my fancy pluck
 Upon my hateful life. Another way
 The news is not so tart.- I'll read, and answer.
[aside] I had rather lose the battle than that sister
 Should loosen him and me.
Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
 For these domestic and particular broils
 Are not the question here.
No.
[aside] O, ho, I know the riddle.- I will go.
      [As they are going out,] enter Edgar [disguised].
Not so hot!
 In his own grace he doth exalt himself
 More than in your addition.
That were the most if he should husband you.
Holla, holla!
 That eye that told you so look'd but asquint.
Mean you to enjoy him?
An interlude!
[aside] If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.
This is mere practice, Gloucester.
 By th' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
 An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquish'd,
 But cozen'd and beguil'd.
Say if I do- the laws are mine, not thine.
 Who can arraign me for't?
Ask me not what I know.                             Exit.
