Seem you that you are not?
So do counterfeits.
What seem I that I am not?
What instance of the contrary?
And how quote you my folly?
My jerkin is a doublet.
How?
That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your
air.
Ay, sir, and done too, for this time.
Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall make your
wit bankrupt.
They say that Love hath not an eye at all.
Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
Since his exile she hath despis'd me most,
Forsworn my company and rail'd at me,
That I am desperate of obtaining her.
Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
Lest it should ravel and be good to none,
You must provide to bottom it on me;
Which must be done by praising me as much
As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.
And thy advice this night I'll put in practice;
Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver,
Let us into the city presently
To sort some gentlemen well skill'd in music.
I have a sonnet that will serve the turn
To give the onset to thy good advice.
How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?
Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.
Who? Silvia?
I thank you for your own. Now, gentlemen,
Let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.
Enter at a distance, HOST, and JULIA in boy's clothes
Where meet we?
Farewell.                  Exeunt THURIO and MUSICIANS
              Enter SILVIA above, at her window
Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my suit?
What, that my leg is too long?
I'll wear a boot to make it somewhat rounder.
What says she to my face?
Nay, then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
How likes she my discourse?
But well when I discourse of love and peace?
What says she to my valour?
What says she to my birth?
Considers she my possessions?
Wherefore?
Not I.
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl
That flies her fortune when it follows her.
I'll after, more to be reveng'd on Eglamour
Than for the love of reckless Silvia.                   Exit
Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I;
I hold him but a fool that will endanger
His body for a girl that loves him not.
I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
