I shall no more to sea, to sea,
Here shall I die ashore-
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral;
well, here's my comfort.                            [Drinks]
The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I,
The gunner, and his mate,
Lov'd Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery,
But none of us car'd for Kate;
For she had a tongue with a tang,
Would cry to a sailor 'Go hang!'
She lov'd not the savour of tar nor of pitch,
Yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch.
Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!
This is a scurvy tune too; but here's my comfort.
                                                    [Drinks]
What's the matter? Have we devils here? Do you
put tricks upon 's with savages and men of Ind? Ha! I
have not scap'd drowning to be afeard now of your four
legs; for it hath been said: As proper a man as ever
went on four legs cannot make him give ground; and it
shall be said so again, while Stephano breathes at
nostrils.
This is some monster of the isle with four legs,
who hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil
should he learn our language? I will give him some
relief, if it be but for that. If I can recover him, and
keep him tame, and get to Naples with him, he's a
present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's
leather.
He's in his fit now, and does not talk after the
wisest. He shall taste of my bottle; if he have never
drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit. If
I can recover him, and keep him tame, I will not take
too much for him; he shall pay for him that hath him,
and that soundly.
Come on your ways; open your mouth; here is
that which will give language to you, cat. Open your
mouth; this will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and
that soundly; you cannot tell who's your friend. Open
your chaps again.
Four legs and two voices; a most delicate monster!
His forward voice, now, is to speak well of his
friend; his backward voice is to utter foul speeches and
to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will recover
him, I will help his ague. Come-Amen! I will pour some
in thy other mouth.
Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy!
This is a devil, and no monster; I will leave him; I
have no long spoon.
If thou beest Trinculo, come forth; I'll pull
the by the lesser legs; if any be Trinculo's legs, these
are they. Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How cam'st thou
to be the siege of this moon-calf? Can he vent
Trinculos?
Prithee, do not turn me about; my stomach is not
constant.
How didst thou scape? How cam'st thou hither?
Swear by this bottle how thou cam'st hither-I escap'd
upon a butt of sack, which the sailors heaved o'erboard-
by this bottle, which I made of the bark of a tree, with
mine own hands, since I was cast ashore.
Here; swear then how thou escap'dst.
 [Passing the bottle]  Here, kiss the book. Though
thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a
goose.
The whole butt, man; my cellar is in a rock by
th' seaside, where my wine is hid. How now, moon-calf!
How does thine ague?
Out o' th' moon, I do assure thee; I was the Man
i' th' Moon, when time was.
Come, swear to that; kiss the book. I will
furnish it anon with new contents. Swear.
                                            [CALIBAN drinks]
Come on, then; down, and swear.
Come, kiss.
I prithee now, lead the way without any more
talking. Trinculo, the King and all our company else
being drown'd, we will inherit here. Here, bear my bottle.
Fellow Trinculo, we'll fill him by and by again.
O brave monster! Lead the way.                Exeunt
Tell not me-when the butt is out we will drink
water, not a drop before; therefore bear up, and board
'em. Servant-monster, drink to me.
Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee; thy
eyes are almost set in thy head.
My man-monster hath drown'd his tongue in
sack. For my part, the sea cannot drown me; I swam, ere
I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues, off
and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant,
monster, or my standard.
We'll not run, Monsieur Monster.
Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest
a good moon-calf.
Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head; if
you prove a mutineer-the next tree! The poor monster's
my subject, and he shall not suffer indignity.
Marry will I; kneel and repeat it; I will stand,
and so shall Trinculo.
                 Enter ARIEL, invisible
Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in's tale,
by this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.
Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.
That's most certain.
How now shall this be compass'd? Canst thou
bring me to the party?
Trinculo, run into no further danger; interrupt
the monster one word further and, by this hand, I'll turn
my mercy out o' doors, and make a stock-fish of thee.
Didst thou not say he lied?
Do I so? Take thou that.  [Beats him]  As you like
this, give me the lie another time.
Now, forward with your tale.-Prithee stand
further off.
Stand farther. Come, proceed.
Is it so brave a lass?
Monster, I will kill this man; his daughter and I
will be King and Queen-save our Graces!-and Trinculo
and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou like the plot,
Trinculo?
Give me thy hand; I am sorry I beat thee; but
while thou liv'st, keep a good tongue in thy head.
Ay, on mine honour.
At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any
reason. Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.              [Sings]
Flout 'em and scout 'em,
And scout 'em and flout 'em;
Thought is free.
What is this same?
If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy
likeness; if thou beest a devil, take't as thou list.
He that dies pays all debts. I defy thee. Mercy
upon us!
No, monster, not I.
This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I
shall have my music for nothing.
That shall be by and by; I remember the story.
Lead, monster; we'll follow. I would I could see
this taborer; he lays it on.
Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless
fairy, has done little better than play'd the Jack with us.
So is mine. Do you hear, monster? If I should
take a displeasure against you, look you-
There is not only disgrace and dishonour in
that, monster, but an infinite loss.
I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er
ears for my labour.
Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody
thoughts.
Put off that gown, Trinculo; by this hand, I'll
have that gown.
Be you quiet, monster. Mistress line, is not
this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line; now,
jerkin, you are like to lose your hair, and prove a bald
jerkin.
I thank thee for that jest; here's a garment
for't. Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of
this country. 'Steal by line and level' is an excellent
pass of pate; there's another garmet for't.
Monster, lay-to your fingers; help to bear this
away where my hogshead of wine is, or I'll turn you out
of my kingdom. Go to, carry this.
Ay, and this.
      A noise of hunters beard. Enter divers SPIRITS, in
         shape of dogs and hounds, bunting them about;
               PROSPERO and ARIEL setting them on
Every man shift for all the rest, and let no man
take care for himself; for all is but fortune. Coragio,
bully-monster, coragio!
O, touch me not; I am not Stephano, but a
cramp.
I should have been a sore one, then.
