What country, friends, is this?
And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elysium.
Perchance he is not drown'd- what think you, sailors?
O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.
For saying so, there's gold.
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
The like of him. Know'st thou this country?
Who governs here?
What is his name?
Orsino! I have heard my father name him.
He was a bachelor then.
What's she?
O that I serv'd that lady,
And might not be delivered to the world,
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,
What my estate is!
There is a fair behaviour in thee, Captain;
And though that nature with a beauteous wall
Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee
I will believe thou hast a mind that suits
With this thy fair and outward character.
I prithee, and I'll pay thee bounteously,
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid
For such disguise as haply shall become
The form of my intent. I'll serve this duke:
Thou shalt present me as an eunuch to him;
It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing
And speak to him in many sorts of music,
That will allow me very worth his service.
What else may hap to time I will commit;
Only shape thou silence to my wit.
I thank thee. Lead me on.                        Exeunt
You either fear his humour or my negligence, that you call
in question the continuance of his love. Is he inconstant, sir,
in his favours?
I thank you. Here comes the Count.
On your attendance, my lord, here.
Sure, my noble lord,
If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.
Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
I think not so, my lord.
I'll do my best
To woo your lady. [Aside] Yet, a barful strife!
Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.
The honourable lady of the house, which is she?
Most radiant, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty- I pray you
tell me if this be the lady of the house, for I never saw her. I
would be loath to cast away my speech; for, besides that it is
excellently well penn'd, I have taken great pains to con it. Good
beauties, let me sustain no scorn; I am very comptible, even to
the least sinister usage.
I can say little more than I have studied, and that
question's out of my part. Good gentle one, give me modest
assurance if you be the lady of the house, that I may proceed in
my speech.
No, my profound heart; and yet, by the very fangs of malice
I swear, I am not that I play. Are you the lady of the house?
Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself; for
what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve. But this is from
my commission. I will on with my speech in your praise, and then
show you the heart of my message.
Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.
No, good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer.
Some mollification for your giant, sweet lady.
I am a messenger.
It alone concerns your ear. I bring no overture of war, no
taxation of homage: I hold the olive in my hand; my words are as
full of peace as matter.
The rudeness that hath appear'd in me have I learn'd from my
entertainment. What I am and what I would are as secret as
maidenhead- to your cars, divinity; to any other's, profanation.
Most sweet lady-
In Orsino's bosom.
To answer by the method: in the first of his heart.
Good madam, let me see your face.
Excellently done, if God did all.
'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on.
Lady, you are the cruell'st she alive,
If you will lead these graces to the grave,
And leave the world no copy.
I see you what you are: you are too proud;
But, if you were the devil, you are fair.
My lord and master loves you- O, such love
Could be but recompens'd though you were crown'd
The nonpareil of beauty!
With adorations, fertile tears,
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
If I did love you in my master's flame,
With such a suff'ring, such a deadly life,
In your denial I would find no sense;
I would not understand it.
Make me a willow cabin at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house;
Write loyal cantons of contemned love
And sing them loud even in the dead of night;
Halloo your name to the reverberate hals,
And make the babbling gossip of the air
Cry out 'Olivia!' O, you should not rest
Between the elements of air and earth
But you should pity me!
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I am a gentleman.
I am no fee'd post, lady; keep your purse;
My master, not myself, lacks recompense.
Love make his heart of flint that you shall love;
And let your fervour, like my master's, be
Plac'd in contempt! Farewell, fair cruelty.             Exit
Even now, sir; on a moderate pace I have since arriv'd but
hither.
She took the ring of me; I'll none of it.
I left no ring with her; what means this lady?
Fortune forbid my outside have not charm'd her!
She made good view of me; indeed, so much
That methought her eyes had lost her tongue,
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
She loves me, sure: the cunning of her passion
Invites me in this churlish messenger.
None of my lord's ring! Why, he sent her none.
I am the man. If it be so- as 'tis-
Poor lady, she were better love a dream.
Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
How easy is it for the proper-false
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms!
Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we!
For such as we are made of, such we be.
How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,
And I, poor monster, fond as much on him;
And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my master's love;
As I am woman- now alas the day!-
What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!
O Time, thou must untangle this, not I;
It is too hard a knot for me t' untie!                  Exit
It gives a very echo to the seat
Where Love is thron'd.
A little, by your favour.
Of your complexion.
About your years, my lord.
I think it well, my lord.
And so they are; alas, that they are so!
To die, even when they to perfection grow!
              Re-enter CURIO and CLOWN
But if she cannot love you, sir?
Sooth, but you must.
Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Olivia. You cannot love her;
You tell her so. Must she not then be answer'd?
Ay, but I know-
Too well what love women to men may owe.
In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
My father had a daughter lov'd a man,
As it might be perhaps, were I a woman,
I should your lordship.
A blank, my lord. She never told her love,
But let concealment, like a worm i' th' bud,
Feed on her damask cheek. She pin'd in thought;
And with a green and yellow melancholy
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.
I am all the daughters of my father's house,
And all the brothers too- and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this lady?
Save thee, friend, and thy music!
Dost thou live by thy tabor?
Art thou a churchman?
So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar, if a beggar
dwell near him; or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor
stand by the church.
Nay, that's certain; they that dally nicely with words may
quickly make them wanton.
Why, man?
Thy reason, man?
I warrant thou art a merry fellow and car'st for nothing.
Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool?
I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.
Nay, an thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee.
Hold, there's expenses for thee.             [Giving a coin]
By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for one;
[Aside] though I would not have it grow on my chin.- Is thy lady
within?
Yes, being kept together and put to use.
I understand you, sir; 'tis well begg'd.
                                       [Giving another coin]
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
And to do that well craves a kind of wit.
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time;
And, like the haggard, check at every feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practice
As full of labour as a wise man's art;
For folly that he wisely shows is fit;
But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
            Enter SIR TOBY and SIR ANDREW
And you, sir.
Et vous aussi; votre serviteur.
I am bound to your niece, sir; I mean, she is the list of my
voyage.
My legs do better understand me, sir, than I understand what
you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we are
prevented.
              Enter OLIVIA and MARIA
Most excellent accomplish'd lady, the heavens rain odours on you!
My matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant
and vouchsafed car.
My duty, madam, and most humble service.
Cesario is your servant's name, fair Princess.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:
Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
On his behalf.
Dear lady-
I Pity YOU.
No, not a grize; for 'tis a vulgar proof
That very oft we pity enemies.
Then westward-ho!
Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship!
You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
That you do think you are not what you are.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
Would it be better, madam, than I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth,
I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth,
And that no woman has; nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu, good madam; never more
Will I my master's tears to you deplore.
With the same haviour that your passion bears
Goes on my master's griefs.
Nothing but this- your true love for my master.
I will acquit you.
And you, sir.
You mistake, sir; I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me;
my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offence
done to any man.
I pray you, sir, what is he?
I will return again into the house and desire some conduct
of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard of some kind of men
that put quarrels purposely on others to taste their valour;
belike this is a man of that quirk.
This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you do me this
courteous office as to know of the knight what my offence to him
is: it is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.
Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?
I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
I shall be much bound to you for't. I am one that would
rather go with sir priest than sir knight. I care not who knows
so much of my mettle.                                 Exeunt
            Re-enter SIR TOBY With SIR ANDREW
[Aside] Pray God defend me! A little thing would make me
tell them how much I lack of a man.
I do assure you 'tis against my will.
Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
What money, sir?
For the fair kindness you have show'd me here,
And part being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
I'll lend you something. My having is not much;
I'll make division of my present with you;
Hold, there's half my coffer.
I know of none,
Nor know I you by voice or any feature.
I hate ingratitude more in a man
Than lying, vainness, babbling drunkenness,
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood.
Methinks his words do from such passion fly
That he believes himself; so do not I.
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,
That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
He nam'd Sebastian. I my brother know
Yet living in my glass; even such and so
In favour was my brother; and he went
Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
For him I imitate. O, if it prove,
Tempests are kind, and salt waves fresh in love!        Exit
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
He did me kindness, sir; drew on my side;
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me.
I know not what 'twas but distraction.
How can this be?
Madam?
My lord would speak; my duty hushes me.
And I, most jocund, apt, and willingly,
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
After him I love
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesses above
Punish my life for tainting of my love!
Who does beguile you? Who does do you wrong?
No, my lord, not I.
My lord, I do protest-
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you.
You drew your sword upon me without cause;
But I bespake you fair and hurt you not.
            Enter SIR TOBY and CLOWN
Of Messaline; Sebastian was my father.
Such a Sebastian was my brother too;
So went he suited to his watery tomb;
If spirits can assume both form and suit,
You come to fright us.
My father had a mole upon his brow.
And died that day when Viola from her birth
Had numb'red thirteen years.
If nothing lets to make us happy both
But this my masculine usurp'd attire,
Do not embrace me till each circumstance
Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
That I am Viola; which to confirm,
I'll bring you to a captain in this town,
Where lie my maiden weeds; by whose gentle help
I was preserv'd to serve this noble Count.
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this lady and this lord.
And all those sayings will I overswear;
And all those swearings keep as true in soul
As doth that orbed continent the fire
That severs day from night.
The captain that did bring me first on shore
Hath my maid's garments. He, upon some action,
Is now in durance, at Malvolio's suit,
A gentleman and follower of my lady's.
