Take the fool away.
Go to, y'are a dry fool; I'll no more of you. Besides, you
grow dishonest.
Sir, I bade them take away you.
Can you do it?
Make your proof.
Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I'll bide your
proof.
Good fool, for my brother's death.
I know his soul is in heaven, fool.
What think you of this fool, Malvolio? Doth he not mend?
How say you to that, Malvolio?
O, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste with a
distemper'd appetite. To be generous, guiltless, and of free
disposition, is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem
cannon bullets. There is no slander in an allow'd fool, though he
do nothing but rail; nor no railing in known discreet man, though
he do nothing but reprove.
From the Count Orsino, is it?
Who of my people hold him in delay?
Fetch him off, I pray you; he speaks nothing but madman.
Fie on him! [Exit MARIA] Go you, Malvolio: if it be a suit from
the Count, I am sick, or not at home- what you will to dismiss
it. [Exit MALVOLIO] Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old,
and people dislike it.
By mine honour, half drunk! What is he at the gate, cousin?
A gentleman! What gentleman?
Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this
lethargy?
Ay, marry; what is he?
What's a drunken man like, fool?
Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz;
for he's in the third degree of drink, he's drown'd; go look
after him.
Tell him he shall not speak with me.
What kind o' man is he?
What manner of man?
Of what personage and years is he?
Let him approach. Call in my gentlewoman.
Give me my veil; come, throw it o'er my face;
We'll once more hear Orsino's embassy.
                         Enter VIOLA
Speak to me; I shall answer for her. Your will?
Whence came you, sir?
Are you a comedian?
If I do not usurp myself, I am.
Come to what is important in't. I forgive you the praise.
It is the more like to be feigned; I pray you keep it in. I
heard you were saucy at my gates, and allow'd your approach
rather to wonder at you than to hear you. If you be not mad, be
gone; if you have reason, be brief; 'tis not that time of moon
with me to make one in so skipping dialogue.
Tell me your mind.
Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the
courtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.
Yet you began rudely. What are you? What would you?
Give us the place alone; we will hear this divinity.
[Exeunt MARIA and ATTENDANTS] Now, sir, what is your text?
A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it.
Where lies your text?
In his bosom! In what chapter of his bosom?
O, I have read it; it is heresy. Have you no more to say?
Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my
face? You are now out of your text; but we will draw the curtain
and show you the picture. [Unveiling] Look you, sir, such a one I
was this present. Is't not well done?
'Tis in grain, sir; 'twill endure wind and weather.
O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted; I will give out
divers schedules of my beauty. It shall be inventoried, and every
particle and utensil labell'd to my will: as- item, two lips
indifferent red; item, two grey eyes with lids to them; item, one
neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you sent hither to praise me?
How does he love me?
Your lord does know my mind; I cannot love him.
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
In voices well divulg'd, free, learn'd, and valiant,
And in dimension and the shape of nature
A gracious person; but yet I cannot love him.
He might have took his answer long ago.
Why, what would you?
You might do much.
What is your parentage?
Get you to your lord.
I cannot love him; let him send no more-
Unless perchance you come to me again
To tell me how he takes it. Fare you well.
I thank you for your pains; spend this for me.
'What is your parentage?'
'Above my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I am a gentleman.' I'll be sworn thou art;
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit,
Do give thee five-fold blazon. Not too fast! Soft, soft!
Unless the master were the man. How now!
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
Methinks I feel this youth's perfections
With an invisible and subtle stealth
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.
What ho, Malvolio!
                    Re-enter MALVOLIO
Run after that same peevish messenger,
The County's man. He left this ring behind him,
Would I or not. Tell him I'll none of it.
Desire him not to flatter with his lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes; I am not for him.
If that the youth will come this way to-morrow,
I'll give him reasons for't. Hie thee, Malvolio.
I do I know not what, and fear to find
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.
Fate, show thy force: ourselves we do not owe;
What is decreed must be; and be this so!                Exit
Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
[Exeunt all but OLIVIA and VIOLA] Give me your hand, sir.
What is your name?
My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world
Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment.
Y'are servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
For him, I think not on him; for his thoughts,
Would they were blanks rather than fill'd with me!
O, by your leave, I pray you:
I bade you never speak again of him;
But, would you undertake another suit,
I had rather hear you to solicit that
Than music from the spheres.
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
After the last enchantment you did here,
A ring in chase of you; so did I abuse
Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you.
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you in a shameful cunning
Which you knew none of yours. What might you think?
Have you not set mine honour at the stake,
And baited it with all th' unmuzzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
Enough is shown: a cypress, not a bosom,
Hides my heart. So, let me hear you speak.
That's a degree to love.
Why, then, methinks 'tis time to smile again.
O world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the lion than the wolf!       [Clock strikes]
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
Be not afraid, good youth; I will not have you;
And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest,
Your wife is like to reap a proper man.
There lies your way, due west.
Stay.
I prithee tell me what thou think'st of me.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
I would you were as I would have you be!
O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
In the contempt and anger of his lip!
A murd'rous guilt shows not itself more soon
Than love that would seem hid: love's night is noon.
Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
By maidhood, honour, truth, and every thing,
I love thee so that, maugre all thy pride,
Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause;
But rather reason thus with reason fetter:
Love sought is good, but given unsought is better.
Yet come again; for thou perhaps mayst move
That heart which now abhors to like his love.         Exeunt
I have sent after him; he says he'll come.
How shall I feast him? What bestow of him?
For youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd.
I speak too loud.
Where's Malvolio? He is sad and civil,
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes.
Where is Malvolio?
Why, what's the matter? Does he rave?
Go call him hither.                         Exit MARIA
I am as mad as he,
If sad and merry madness equal be.
           Re-enter MARIA with MALVOLIO
How now, Malvolio!
Smil'st thou?
I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
Why, how dost thou, man? What is the matter with thee?
Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?
God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so, and kiss thy hand
so oft?
What mean'st thou by that, Malvolio?
Ha?
What say'st thou?
Heaven restore thee!
'Thy yellow stockings?'
'Cross-garter'd?'
Am I made?
Why, this is very midsummer madness.
                 Enter SERVANT
I'll come to him. [Exit SERVANT] Good Maria, let this
fellow be look'd to. Where's my cousin Toby? Let some of my
people have a special care of him; I would not have him miscarry
for the half of my dowry.
                                     Exeunt OLIVIA and MARIA
I have said too much unto a heart of stone,
And laid mine honour too unchary out;
There's something in me that reproves my fault;
But such a headstrong potent fault it is
That it but mocks reproof.
Here, wear this jewel for me; 'tis my picture.
Refuse it not; it hath no tongue to vex you.
And I beseech you come again to-morrow.
What shall you ask of me that I'll deny,
That honour sav'd may upon asking give?
How with mine honour may I give him that
Which I have given to you?
Well, come again to-morrow. Fare thee well;
A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.           Exit
          Re-enter SIR TOBY and SIR FABIAN
Hold, Toby; on thy life, I charge thee hold.
Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
Where manners ne'er were preach'd! Out of my sight!
Be not offended, dear Cesario-
Rudesby, be gone!
                     Exeunt SIR TOBY, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
I prithee, gentle friend,
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway
In this uncivil and unjust extent
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
Mayst smile at this. Thou shalt not choose but go;
Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me!
He started one poor heart of mine in thee.
Nay, come, I prithee. Would thou'dst be rul'd by me!
O, say so, and so be!                           Exeunt
Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,
Now go with me and with this holy man
Into the chantry by; there, before him
And underneath that consecrated roof,
Plight me the fun assurance of your faith,
That my most jealous and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth. What do you say?
Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine
That they may fairly note this act of mine!           Exeunt
What would my lord, but that he may not have,
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
What do you say, Cesario? Good my lord-
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
As howling after music.
Still so constant, lord.
Even what it please my lord, that shall become him.
Where goes Cesario?
Ay me, detested! How am I beguil'd!
Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?
Call forth the holy father.                Exit an ATTENDANT
Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.
Ay, husband; can he that deny?
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
That makes thee strangle thy propriety.
Fear not, Cesario, take thy fortunes up;
Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fear'st.
               Enter PRIEST
O, welcome, father!
Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
Here to unfold- though lately we intended
To keep in darkness what occasion now
Reveals before 'tis ripe- what thou dost know
Hath newly pass'd between this youth and me.
O, do not swear!
Hold little faith, though thou has too much fear.
              Enter SIR ANDREW
What's the matter?
Who has done this, Sir Andrew?
Away with him. Who hath made this havoc with them?
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be look'd to.
              Exeunt CLOWN, FABIAN, SIR TOBY, and SIR ANDREW
                  Enter SEBASTIAN
Most wonderful!
He shall enlarge him. Fetch Malvolio hither;
And yet, alas, now I remember me,
They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.
    Re-enter CLOWN, with a letter, and FABIAN
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my remembrance clearly banish'd his.
How does he, sirrah?
Open't, and read it.
How now! Art thou mad?
Prithee read i' thy right wits.
[To FABIAN] Read it you, sirrah.
Did he write this?
See him deliver'd, Fabian; bring him hither.
                                                 Exit FABIAN
My lord, so please you, these things further thought on,
To think me as well a sister as a wife,
One day shall crown th' alliance on't, so please you,
Here at my house, and at my proper cost.
A sister! You are she.
            Re-enter FABIAN, with MALVOLIO
Ay, my lord, this same.
How now, Malvolio!
Have I, Malvolio? No.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
Though, I confess, much like the character;
But out of question 'tis Maria's hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then cam'st in smiling,
And in such forms which here were presuppos'd
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content;
This practice hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee,
But, when we know the grounds and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
Of thine own cause.
Alas, poor fool, how have they baffl'd thee!
He hath been most notoriously abus'd.
