By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o' nights;
your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.
Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits
of order.
That quaffing and drinking will undo you; I heard my lady
talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you brought in
one night here to be her wooer.
Ay, he.
What's that to th' purpose?
Ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats; he's a
very fool and a prodigal.
He hath indeed, almost natural; for, besides that he's a
fool, he's a great quarreller; and but that he hath the gift of a
coward to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling, 'tis thought
among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
They that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.
And you too, sir.
My name is Mary, sir.
Fare you well, gentlemen.
Sir, I have not you by th' hand.
Now, sir, thought is free. I pray you, bring your hand to
th' buttry-bar and let it drink.
It's dry, sir.
A dry jest, sir.
Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends; marry, now I let
go your hand, I am barren.                        Exit MARIA
Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will not open
my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse; my
lady will hang thee for thy absence.
Make that good.
A good lenten answer. I can tell thee where that saying was
born, of 'I fear no colours.'
In the wars; and that may you be bold to say in your
foolery.
Yet you will be hang'd for being so long absent; or to be
turn'd away- is not that as good as a hanging to you?
You are resolute, then?
That if one break, the other will hold; or if both break,
your gaskins fall.
Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my lady. Make
your excuse wisely, you were best.                      Exit
                 Enter OLIVIA and MALVOLIO
Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires
to speak with you.
I know not, madam; 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.
Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.
Will you hoist sail, sir? Here lies your way.
What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady have not
call'd up her steward Malvolio, and bid him turn you out of
doors, never trust me.
For the love o' God, peace!
                   Enter MALVOLIO
Nay, good Sir Toby.
Go shake your ears.
Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for to-night; since the youth of
the Count's was to-day with my lady, she is much out of quiet.
For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone with him; if I do not gull
him into a nayword, and make him a common recreation, do not
think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed. I know I can
do it.
Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of Puritan.
The devil a Puritan that he is, or anything constantly but a
time-pleaser; an affection'd ass that cons state without book and
 utters it by great swarths; the best persuaded of himself, so
cramm'd, as he thinks, with excellencies that it is his grounds
of faith that all that look on him love him; and on that vice in
him will my revenge find notable cause to work.
I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love;
wherein, by the colour of his beard, the shape of his leg, the
manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and
complexion, he shall find himself most feelingly personated. I
can write very like my lady, your niece; on forgotten matter we
can hardly make distinction of our hands.
My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour.
Ass, I doubt not.
Sport royal, I warrant you. I know my physic will work with
him. I will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where
he shall find the letter; observe his construction of it. For
this night, to bed, and dream on the event. Farewell.
Get ye all three into the box-tree. Malvolio's coming down
this walk. He has been yonder i' the sun practising behaviour to
his own shadow this half hour. Observe him, for the love of
mockery, for I know this letter will make a contemplative idiot
of him. Close, in the name of jesting! [As the men hide she drops
a letter] Lie thou there; for here comes the trout that must be
caught with tickling.
                  Enter MALVOLIO
Nay, but say true; does it work upon him?
If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourselves into
stitches, follow me. Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very
renegado; for there is no Christian that means to be saved by
believing rightly can ever believe such impossible passages of
grossness. He's in yellow stockings.
Most villainously; like a pedant that keeps a school i' th'
church. I have dogg'd him like his murderer. He does obey every
point of the letter that I dropp'd to betray him. He does smile
his face into more lines than is in the new map with the
augmentation of the Indies. You have not seen such a thing as
'tis; I  can hardly forbear hurling things at him. I know my lady
will strike him; if she do, he'll smile and take't for a great
favour.
He's coming, madam; but in very strange manner.
He is sure possess'd, madam.
No, madam, he does nothing but smile. Your ladyship were
best to have some guard about you if he come; for sure the man is
tainted in's wits.
How do you, Malvolio?
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! Did not I tell
you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a care of him.
La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at
heart! Pray God he be not bewitched.
Marry, and it shall be done to-morrow morning, if I live. My
lady would not lose him for more than I'll say.
O Lord!
Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.
No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.
Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.
The house will be the quieter.
You may have very fit occasion for't; he is now in some
commerce with my lady, and will by and by depart.
Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard; make him
believe thou art Sir Topas the curate; do it quickly. I'll call
Sir Toby the whilst.                                    Exit
Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown: he
sees thee not.
