Sir Toby Belch! How now, Sir Toby Belch!
Bless you, fair shrew.
What's that?
Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.
Good Mistress Mary Accost-
By my troth, I would not undertake her in this company.
Is that the meaning of 'accost'?
An you part so, mistress, I would I might never draw
sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?
Marry, but you shall have; and here's my hand.
Wherefore, sweetheart? What's your metaphor?
Why, I think so; I am not such an ass but I can keep my
hand dry. But what's your jest?
Are you full of them?
Never in your life, I think; unless you see canary put
me down. Methinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian
or an ordinary man has; but I am great eater of beef, and I
believe that does harm to my wit.
An I thought that, I'd forswear it. I'll ride home
to-morrow, Sir Toby.
What is 'pourquoi'- do or not do? I would I had bestowed
that time in the tongues that I have in fencing, dancing, and
bear-baiting. Oh, had I but followed the arts!
Why, would that have mended my hair?
But it becomes me well enough, does't not?
Faith, I'll home to-morrow, Sir Toby. Your niece will
not be seen, or if she be, it's four to one she'll none of me;
the Count himself here hard by woos her.
I'll stay a month longer. I am a fellow o' th' strangest
mind i' th' world; I delight in masques and revels sometimes
altogether.
As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the
degree of my betters; and yet I will not compare with an old man.
Faith, I can cut a caper.
And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong as
any man in Illyria.
Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in
flame-colour'd stock. Shall we set about some revels?
Taurus? That's sides and heart.
Nay, by my troth, I know not; but I know to be up late
is to be up late.
Faith, so they say; but I think it rather consists of
eating and drinking.
Here comes the fool, i' faith.
By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. I had
rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a
breath to sing, as the fool has. In sooth, thou wast in very
gracious fooling last night, when thou spok'st of Pigrogromitus,
of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus; 'twas very
good, i' faith. I sent thee sixpence for thy leman; hadst it?
Excellent! Why, this is the best fooling, when all is
done. Now, a song.
There's a testril of me too; if one knight give a-
Ay, ay; I care not for good life.
                     CLOWN sings
     O mistress mine, where are you roaming?
     O, stay and hear; your true love's coming,
       That can sing both high and low.
       Trip no further, pretty sweeting;
       Journeys end in lovers meeting,
       Every wise man's son doth know.
Excellent good, i' faith!
A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.
Very sweet and contagious, i' faith.
An you love me, let's do't. I am dog at a catch.
Most certain. Let our catch be 'Thou knave.'
'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call
me knave. Begin, fool: it begins 'Hold thy peace.'
Good, i' faith! Come, begin.           [Catch sung]
                     Enter MARIA
Ay, he does well enough if he be dispos'd, and so do I
too; he does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.
'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's ahungry,
to challenge him the field, and then to break promise with him
and make a fool of him.
O, if I thought that, I'd beat him like a dog.
I have no exquisite reason for't, but I have reason good
enough.
I have't in my nose too.
And your horse now would make him an ass.
O, 'twill be admirable!
Before me, she's a good wench.
I was ador'd once too.
If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.
If I do not, never trust me; take it how you will.
And we do not, it is pity of our lives.
                   Enter MARIA
'Slight, I could so beat the rogue-
Pistol him, pistol him.
Fie on him, Jezebel!
That's me, I warrant you.
I knew 'twas I; for many do call me fool.
Her C's, her U's, and her T's. Why that?
So could I too.
Nor I neither.
Or o' mine either?
I' faith, or I either?
I'll make one too.                           Exeunt
Dieu vous garde, monsieur.
I hope, sir, you are; and I am yours.
That youth's a rare courtier- 'Rain odours' well!
'Odours,' 'pregnant,' and 'vouchsafed'- I'll get 'em all
three all ready.
No, faith, I'll not stay a jot longer.
Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to the Count's
servingman than ever she bestow'd upon me; I saw't i' th'
orchard.
As plain as I see you now.
'Slight! will you make an ass o' me?
An't be any way, it must be with valour, for policy I
hate; I had as lief be a Brownist as a politician.
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
Where shall I find you?
Here's the challenge; read it. I warrant there's vinegar
and pepper in't.
Ay, is't, I warrant him; do but read.
Nay, let me alone for swearing.                Exit
Pox on't, I'll not meddle with him.
Plague on't; an I thought he had been valiant, and so
cunning in fence, I'd have seen him damn'd ere I'd have
challeng'd him. Let him let the matter slip, and I'll give him
my horse, grey Capilet.
Pray God he keep his oath!                [They draw]
                  Enter ANTONIO
Marry, will I, sir; and for that I promis'd you, I'll be
as good as my word. He will bear you easily and reins well.
'Slid, I'll after him again and beat him.
And I do not-                                  Exit
Now, sir, have I met you again?
[Striking SEBASTIAN] There's for you.
Nay, let him alone. I'll go another way to work with
him; I'll have an action of battery against him, if there be any
law in Illyria; though I struck him first, yet it's no matter for
that.
For the love of God, a surgeon!
Send one presently to Sir Toby.
Has broke my head across, and has given Sir Toby a
bloody coxcomb too. For the love of God, your help! I had rather
than forty pound I were at home.
The Count's gentleman, one Cesario. We took him for a
coward, but he's the very devil incardinate.
Od's lifelings, here he is! You broke my head for
nothing; and that that did, I was set on to do't by Sir Toby.
If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me; I think
you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb. Here comes Sir Toby halting;
you shall hear more; but if he had not been in drink, he would
have tickl'd you othergates than he did.
I'll help you, Sir Toby, because we'll be dress'd
together.
