Yes, and shall do, till the pangs of death shake him.
Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren
rascal; I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool
that has no more brain than a stone. Look you now, he's out of
his guard already; unless you laugh and minister occasion to him,
he is gagg'd. I protest I take these wise men that crow so at
these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.
Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you. I
told him you were sick; he takes on him to understand so much,
 and therefore comes to speak with you. I told him you were
asleep; he seems to have a foreknowledge of that too, and
therefore comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him,
lady? He's fortified against any denial.
Has been told so; and he says he'll stand at your door
like a sheriff's post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he'll
speak with you.
Why, of mankind.
Of very ill manner; he'll speak with you, will you or no.
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy;
as a squash is before 'tis a peascod, or a codling when 'tis
almost an apple; 'tis with him in standing water, between boy and
man. He is very well-favour'd, and he speaks very shrewishly; one
would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.
Gentlewoman, my lady calls.                     Exit
                      Re-enter MARIA
Here, madam, at your service.
Madam, I will.                                  Exit
Were you not ev'n now with the Countess Olivia?
She returns this ring to you, sir; you might have saved
me my pains, to have taken it away yourself. She adds, moreover,
that you should put your lord into a desperate assurance she will
none of him. And one thing more: that you be never so hardy to
come again in his affairs, unless it be to report your lord's
taking of this. Receive it so.
Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her; and her will is
it should be so return'd. If it be worth stooping for, there it
lies in your eye; if not, be it his that finds it.
My masters, are you mad? Or what are you? Have you no
wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like tinkers at this
time of night? Do ye make an ale-house of my lady's house, that
ye squeak out your coziers' catches without any mitigation or
remorse of voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor
time, in you?
Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My lady bade me tell
you that, though she harbours you as her kins-man, she's nothing
allied to your disorders. If you can separate yourself and your
misdemeanours, you are welcome to the house; if not, and it would
please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you
farewell.
Is't even so?
This is much credit to you.
Mistress Mary, if you priz'd my lady's favour at anything
more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil
rule; she shall know of it, by this hand.
'Tis but fortune; all is fortune. Maria once told me she
did affect me; and I have heard herself come thus near, that,
should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion. Besides, she
uses me with a more exalted respect than any one else that
follows her. What should I think on't?
To be Count Malvolio!
There is example for't: the Lady of the Strachy married
the yeoman of the wardrobe.
Having been three months married to her, sitting in my
state-
Calling my officers about me, in my branch'd velvet gown,
having come from a day-bed- where I have left Olivia sleeping-
And then to have the humour of state; and after a demure
travel of regard, telling them I know my place as I would they
should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman Toby-
Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for
him. I frown the while, and perchance wind up my watch, or play
with my- some rich jewel. Toby approaches; curtsies there to me-
I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile
Saying 'Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on your
niece give me this prerogative of speech'-
'You must amend your drunkenness'-
'Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a
foolish knight'-
'One Sir Andrew.'
What employment have we here?
                                      [Taking up the letter]
By my life, this is my lady's hand: these be her very
C's, her U's, and her T's; and thus makes she her great P's. It
is, in contempt of question, her hand.
[Reads] 'To the unknown belov'd, this, and my good
wishes.' Her very phrases! By your leave, wax. Soft! And the
impressure her Lucrece with which she uses to seal; 'tis my lady.
To whom should this be?
[Reads]
                Jove knows I love,
                  But who?
                Lips, do not move;
                No man must know.'
'No man must know.' What follows? The numbers alter'd!
'No man must know.' If this should be thee, Malvolio?
[Reads]
         'I may command where I adore;
           But silence, like a Lucrece knife,
         With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore;
           M. O. A. I. doth sway my life.'
'M. O. A. I. doth sway my life.'
Nay, but first let me see, let me see, let me see.
'I may command where I adore.' Why, she may command me: I
serve her; she is my lady. Why, this is evident to any formal
capacity; there is no obstruction in this. And the end- what
should that alphabetical position portend? If I could make that
resemble something in me. Softly! M. O. A. I.-
M- Malvolio; M- why, that begins my name.
M- But then there is no consonancy in the sequel; that
suffers under probation: A should follow, but O does.
And then I comes behind.
M. O. A. I. This simulation is not as the former; and
yet, to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of
these letters are in my name. Soft! here follows prose.
                                                     [Reads]
  'If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I am above
thee; but be not afraid of greatness. Some are born great, some
achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. Thy
Fates open their hands; let thy blood and spirit embrace them;
and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy
humble slough and appear fresh. Be opposite with a kinsman, surly
with servants; let thy tongue tang arguments of state; put
thyself into the trick of singularity. She thus advises thee that
sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, and
wish'd to see thee ever cross-garter'd. I say, remember, Go to,
thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so; if not, let me see thee
a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch
Fortune's fingers. Farewell. She that would alter services with
thee,
                                     THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.'
Daylight and champain discovers not more. This is open. I will be
proud, I will read politic authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I
will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point-devise the very
man. I do not now fool myself to let imagination jade me; for
every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me. She did
commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being
cross-garter'd; and in this she manifests herself to my love, and
with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her
liking. I thank my stars I am happy. I will be strange, stout, in
yellow stockings, and cross-garter'd, even with the swiftness of
putting on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yet a
postscript.
[Reads] 'Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou
entertain'st my love, let it appear in thy smiling; thy smiles
become thee well. Therefore in my presence still smile, dear my
sweet, I prithee.'
Jove, I thank thee. I will smile; I will do everything that thou
wilt have me.                                           Exit
Sweet lady, ho, ho.
Sad, lady? I could be sad. This does make some
obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering; but what of that?
If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true
sonnet is: 'Please one and please all.'
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs.
It did come to his hands, and commands shall be executed.
I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
To bed? Ay, sweetheart, and I'll come to thee.
At your request? Yes, nightingales answer daws!
'Be not afraid of greatness.' 'Twas well writ.
'Some achieve greatness,'-
'And some have greatness thrust upon them.'
'Remember who commended thy yellow stockings,'-
'And wish'd to see thee cross-garterd.'
'Go to, thou an made, if thou desir'st to be so';-
'If not, let me see thee a servant still.'
O, ho! do you come near me now? No worse man than Sir
Toby to look to me! This concurs directly with the letter: she
sends him on purpose, that I may appear stubborn to him; for she
incites me to that in the letter. 'Cast thy humble slough,' says
she. 'Be opposite with kinsman, surly with servants; let thy
tongue tang with arguments of state; put thyself into the trick
of singularity' and consequently sets down the manner how, as: a
sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of
some sir of note, and so forth. I have lim'd her; but it is
Jove's doing, and Jove make me thankful! And when she went away
now- 'Let this fellow be look'd to.' 'Fellow,' not 'Malvolio' nor
after my degree, but 'fellow.' Why, everything adheres together,
that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle,
no incredulous or unsafe circumstance- What can be said? Nothing
that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my
hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is the doer of this, and he is to be
thanked.
         Re-enter MARIA, with SIR TOBY and FABIAN
Go off; I discard you. Let me enjoy my private; go off.
Ah, ha! does she so?
Do you know what you say?
How now, mistress!
Sir!
My prayers, minx!
Go, hang yourselves all! You are idle shallow things; I
am not of your element; you shall know more hereafter.
[Within] Who calls there?
Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged. Good Sir Topas, do
not think I am mad; they have laid me here in hideous darkness.
As hell, Sir Topas.
I am not mad, Sir Topas. I say to you this house is dark.
I say this house is as dark as ignorance, though
ignorance were as dark as hell; and I say there was never man
thus abus'd. I am no more mad than you are; make the trial of it
in any constant question.
That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his
opinion.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas!
Fool!
Fool!
Fool I say!
Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand,
help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper; as I am a
gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee for't.
Ay, good fool.
Fool, there was never man so notoriously abus'd;
I am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art.
They have here propertied me; keep me in darkness, send
ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to face me out of my
wits.
Sir Topas!
Fool, fool, fool, I say!
Good fool, help me to some light and some paper.
I tell thee I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.
By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper, and
light; and convey what I will set down to my lady. It shall
advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.
Believe me, I am not; I tell thee true.
Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree; I prithe be
gone.
Madam, you have done me wrong,
Notorious wrong.
Lady, you have. Pray you peruse that letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand;
Write from it if you can, in hand or phrase;
Or say 'tis not your seal, not your invention;
You can say none of this. Well, grant it then,
And tell me, in the modesty of honour,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour,
Bade me come smiling and cross-garter'd to you,
To put on yellow stockings, and to frown
Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people;
And, acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
And made the most notorious geck and gul
That e'er invention play'd on? Tell me why.
I'll be reveng'd on the whole pack of you.
