What a plague means my niece to take the death of her
brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.
Why, let her except before excepted.
Confine! I'll confine myself no finer than I am. These
clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too;
an they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
Who? Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.
Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.
Fie that you'll say so! He plays o' th' viol-de-gamboys,
and speaks three or four languages word for word without book,
and hath all the good gifts of nature.
By this hand, they are scoundrels and subtractors that
say so of him. Who are they?
With drinking healths to my niece; I'll drink to her as
long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria.
He's a coward and a coystrill that will not drink to my niece
till his brains turn o' th' toe like a parish-top. What, wench!
Castiliano vulgo! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.
                Enter SIR ANDREW AGUECHEEK
Sweet Sir Andrew!
Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.
My niece's chambermaid.
You mistake, knight. 'Accost' is front her, board her,
woo her, assail her.
An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst never
draw sword again!
O knight, thou lack'st a cup of canary! When did I see
thee so put down?
No question.
Pourquoi, my dear knight?
Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
Past question; for thou seest it will not curl by nature.
Excellent; it hangs like flax on a distaff, and I hope to
see a huswife take thee between her legs and spin it off.
She'll none o' th' Count; she'll not match above her
degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit; I have heard her
swear't. Tut, there's life in't, man.
Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
And I can cut the mutton to't.
Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these
gifts a curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like
Mistress Mall's picture? Why dost thou not go to church in a
galliard and come home in a coranto? My very walk should be a
jig; I would not so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. What
dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think, by
the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was form'd under the
star of a galliard.
What shall we do else? Were we not born under Taurus?
No, sir; it is legs and thighs. Let me see the caper. Ha,
higher! Ha, ha, excellent!                            Exeunt
A gentleman.
'Tis a gentleman here. [Hiccups] A plague o' these
pickle-herring! How now, sot!
Lechery! I defy lechery. There's one at the gate.
Let him be the devil an he will, I care not; give me
faith, say I. Well, it's all one.                       Exit
Approach, Sir Andrew. Not to be abed after midnight is to
be up betimes; and 'diluculo surgere' thou know'st-
A false conclusion! I hate it as an unfill'd can. To be
up after midnight and to go to bed then is early; so that to go
to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes. Does not our lives
consist of the four elements?
Th'art a scholar; let us therefore eat and drink.
Marian, I say! a stoup of wine.
                      Enter CLOWN
Welcome, ass. Now let's have a catch.
Come on, there is sixpence for you. Let's have a song.
A love-song, a love-song.
Good, good!
                     CLOWN sings
       What is love? 'Tis not hereafter;
       Present mirth hath present laughter;
         What's to come is still unsure.
       In delay there lies no plenty,
       Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty;
         Youth's a stuff will not endure.
A contagious breath.
To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall
we make the welkin dance indeed? Shall we rouse the night-owl in
a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? Shall we do
that?
My lady's a Cataian, we are politicians, Malvolio's a
Peg-a-Ramsey, and                                    [Sings]
              Three merry men be we.
Am not I consanguineous? Am I not of her blood? Tilly-vally,
lady.                                                [Sings]
          There dwelt a man in Babylon,
          Lady, lady.
[Sings] O' the twelfth day of December-
We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!
[Sings] Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.
[Sings] But I will never die.           [Falls down]
[Sings] Shall I bid him go?
[Sings] Shall I bid him go, and spare not?
[Rising] Out o' tune, sir! Ye lie. Art any more than a
steward? Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall
be no more cakes and ale?
Do't, knight. I'll write thee a challenge; or I'll
deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
Possess us, possess us; tell us something of him.
What, for being a Puritan? Thy exquisite reason, dear
knight?
What wilt thou do?
Excellent! I smell a device.
He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that
they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.
Good night, Penthesilea.
She's a beagle true-bred, and one that adores me.
What o' that?
Let's to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for more
money.
Send for money, knight; if thou hast her not i' th' end,
call me Cut.
Come, come, I'll go burn some sack; 'tis too late to go
to bed now. Come, knight; come, knight.
                                                      Exeunt
Come thy ways, Signior Fabian.
Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally
sheep-biter come by some notable shame?
To anger him we'll have the bear again; and we will fool
him black and blue- shall we not, Sir Andrew?
Here comes the little villain.
How now, my metal of India!
Here's an overweening rogue!
Peace, I say.
Ah, rogue!
Peace, peace!
O, for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye!
Fire and brimstone!
Bolts and shackles!
Shall this fellow live?
And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
What, what?
Out, scab!
O, peace! And the spirit of humours intimate reading
aloud to him!
Marry, hang thee, brock!
Excellent wench, say I.
And with what wing the staniel checks at it!
O, ay, make up that! He is now at a cold scent.
Ay, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry 'O!'
I could marry this wench for this device.
And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
                      Enter MARIA
Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy
bond-slave?
Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the
image of it leaves him he must run mad.
Like aqua-vita! with a midwife.
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
Save you, gentleman!
Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you
should enter, if your trade be to her.
Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion.
I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.
And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a
sailor.
Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
valour. Challenge me the Count's youth to fight with him; hurt
him in eleven places. My niece shall take note of it; and assure
thyself there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in
man's commendation with woman than report of valour.
Go, write it in a martial hand; be curst and brief; it is
no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full of invention.
Taunt him with the license of ink; if thou thou'st him some
thrice, it shall not be amiss; and as many lies as will lie in
thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough for the
bed of Ware in England, set 'em down; go about it. Let there be
gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no
matter. About it.
We'll call thee at the cubiculo. Go.
                                             Exit SIR ANDREW
I have been dear to him, lad- some two thousand strong,
or so.
Never trust me then; and by all means stir on the youth
to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them
together. For Andrew, if he were open'd and you find so much
blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the
rest of th' anatomy.
Look where the youngest wren of nine comes.
And cross-garter'd?
Come, bring us, bring us where he is.         Exeunt
Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all the
devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possess'd
him, yet I'll speak to him.
How is't with you, man?
Go to, go to; peace, peace; we must deal gently with him.
Let me alone. How do you, Malvolio? How is't with you? What, man,
defy the devil; consider, he's an enemy to mankind.
Prithee hold thy peace; this is not the way. Do you not
see you move him? Let me alone with him.
Why, how now, my bawcock!
How dost thou, chuck?
Ay, Biddy, come with me. What, man, 'tis not for gravity
to play at cherrypit with Satan. Hang him, foul collier!
Is't possible?
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device,
man.
Come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound. My niece
is already in the belief that he's mad. We may carry it thus, for
our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of
breath, prompt us to have mercy on him; at which time we will
bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of
madmen. But see, but see.
                 Enter SIR ANDREW
Give me. [Reads] 'Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art
but a scurvy fellow.'
[Reads] 'Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, why I do
call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't.'
[Reads] 'Thou com'st to the Lady Olivia, and in my sight
she uses thee kindly; but thou liest in thy throat; that is not
the matter I challenge thee for.'
[Reads] 'I will waylay thee going home; where if it be
thy chance to kill me'-
'Thou kill'st me like a rogue and a villain.'
[Reads] 'Fare thee well; and God have mercy upon one of
our souls! He may have mercy upon mine; but my hope is better,
and so look to thyself. Thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy
sworn enemy,
                                          ANDREW AGUECHEEK.'
If this letter move him not, his legs cannot. I'll give't him.
Go, Sir Andrew; scout me for him at the corner of the
orchard, like a bum-baily; so soon as ever thou seest him, draw;
and as thou draw'st, swear horrible; for it comes to pass oft
that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twang'd
off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would
have earn'd him. Away.
Now will not I deliver his letter; for the behaviour of
the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and
breeding; his employment between his lord and my niece confirms
no less. Therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant,
will breed no terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a
clodpole. But, sir, I will deliver his challenge by word of
mouth, set upon Aguecheek notable report of valour, and drive the
gentleman- as know his youth will aptly receive it- into a most
hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. This
will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the
look, like cockatrices.
            Re-enter OLIVIA. With VIOLA
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a
challenge.
                          Exeunt SIR TOBY, FABIAN, and MARIA
Gentleman, God save thee.
That defence thou hast, betake thee tot. Of what nature
the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not; but thy
intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends
thee at the orchard end. Dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy
preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skilful, and deadly.
You'll find it otherwise, I assure you; therefore, if you
hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard; for your
opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath, can
furnish man withal.
He is knight, dubb'd with unhatch'd rapier and on carpet
consideration; but he is a devil in private brawl. Souls and
bodies hath he divorc'd three; and his incensement at this moment
is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of
death and sepulchre. Hob-nob is his word- give't or take't.
Sir, no; his indignation derives itself out of a very
competent injury; therefore, get you on and give him his desire.
Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with
me which with as much safety you might answer him; therefore on,
or strip your sword stark naked; for meddle you must, that's
certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
I Will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this gentleman
till my return.                                Exit SIR TOBY
Why, man, he's a very devil; I have not seen such a
firago. I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all, and he
gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion that it is
inevitable; and on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet
hit the ground they step on. They say he has been fencer to the
Sophy.
Ay, but he will not now be pacified; Fabian can scarce
hold him yonder.
I'll make the motion. Stand here, make a good show on't;
this shall end without the perdition of souls. [Aside] Marry,
I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you.
          Re-enter FABIAN and VIOLA
[To FABIAN] I have his horse to take up the quarrel; I have
persuaded him the youth's a devil.
[To VIOLA] There's no remedy, sir: he will fight with you
for's oath sake. Marry, he hath better bethought him of his
quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of.
Therefore draw for the supportance of his vow; he protests he
will not hurt you.
Come, Sir Andrew, there's no remedy; the gentleman will,
for his honour's sake, have one bout with you; he cannot by the
duello avoid it; but he has promis'd me, as he is a gentleman and
a soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on; to't.
You, sir! Why, what are you?
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
                                                 [They draw]
                     Enter OFFICERS
[To ANTONIO] I'll be with you anon.
Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian; we'll whisper
o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a
hare. His dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in
necessity and denying him; and for his cowardship, ask Fabian.
Do; cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
I dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet.
                                                      Exeunt
Hold, sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.
                                         [Holding SEBASTIAN]
Come on, sir; hold.
Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young soldier,
put up your iron; you are well flesh'd. Come on.
What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two of this
malapert blood from you. [Draws]
                    Enter OLIVIA
Madam!
Jove bless thee, Master Parson.
To him, Sir Topas.
The knave counterfeits well; a good knave.
Well said, Master Parson.
My most exquisite Sir Topas!
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou
find'st him. I would we were well rid of this knavery. If he may
be conveniently deliver'd, I would he were; for I am now so far
in offence with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety
this sport to the upshot. Come by and by to my chamber.
                                             Exit with MARIA
That's all one; has hurt me, and there's th' end on't.
Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?
Then he's a rogue and a passy measures pavin. I hate a
drunken rogue.
Will you help- an ass-head and a coxcomb and a knave, a
thin fac'd knave, a gull?
